The following is a conversation with Jamie Metzel,
author specializing in topics of genetic engineering,
biotechnology, and geopolitics.
In the past two years, he has been outspoken
about the need to investigate and keep an open mind
about the origins of COVID 19.
In particular, he has been keeping an extensive
up to date collection of circumstantial evidence
in support of what is colloquially known
as lab leak hypothesis,
that COVID 19 leaked in 2019
from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
In part, I wanted to explore the idea
in response to the thoughtful criticism
to parts of the Francis Collins episode.
I will have more and more difficult conversations like this
with people from all walks of life
and with all kinds of ideas.
I promise to do my best to keep an open mind
and yet to ask hard questions,
while together searching for the beautiful
and the inspiring in the mind of the other person.
It's a hard line to walk gracefully,
especially for someone like me,
who's a bit of an awkward introvert
with barely the grasp of the English language
or any language, except maybe Python and C++.
But I hope you stick around, be patient and empathetic,
and maybe learn something new together with me.
This is the Lux Friedman podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors
in the description.
And now here's my conversation with Jamie Metzel.
What is the probability in your mind
that COVID 19 leaked from a lab?
In your write up, I believe you said 85%.
I know it's just a percentage,
we can't really be exact with these kinds of things,
but it gives us a sense
where your mind is, where your intuition is.
So as it stands today,
what would you say is that probability?
I would stand by what I've been saying
since really the middle of last year.
It's more likely and not, in my opinion,
that the pandemic stems
from an accidental lab incident in Wuhan.
Is it 90%, is it 65%, I mean, that's kind of arbitrary.
But when I stack up all of the available evidence
and all of it on both sides is circumstantial,
it weighs very significantly
toward a lab incident origin.
So before we dive into the specifics at a high level,
what types of evidence,
what intuition, what ideas are leading you
to have that kind of estimate?
Is it possible to kind of condense,
when you look at the wall of evidence before you,
where's your source,
the strongest source of your intuition?
And I would have to say,
it's just logic and deductive reasoning.
So before I make the case for why I think
it's most likely a lab incident origin,
let's just say why it could be
and still it could be natural origin.
All this is natural origin in the sense
that it's a bat virus backbone,
horseshoe bat virus backbone.
Okay, I'm gonna keep pausing you,
define stuff.
So maybe it's useful to say,
what do we mean by lab leak?
What do we mean by natural origin?
What do we mean by virus backbone?
Okay, great questions.
So viruses come from somewhere.
Viruses have been around for 3.5 billion years.
And they've been around for such a long time
because they are adaptive and they're growing
and they're always changing and they're morphing.
And that's why viruses are,
I mean, they've been very successful
and we are victims.
Sometimes we're beneficiaries.
We have viral DNA has morphed into our genomes,
but now it's certainly in the case of COVID 19,
we are victims of the success of viruses.
And so when we talk about a backbone,
so the SARS CoV2 virus has a history
and these viruses don't come out of whole cloth.
There are viruses that morph.
And so we know that at some period,
maybe 20 years ago or whatever,
the virus that is SARS CoV2 existed in horseshoe bats.
It was a horseshoe bat virus and it evolved somewhere.
And there are some people who say
there's no evidence of this,
but it's a plausible theory
based on how things have happened in the past.
Maybe that virus jumped from the horseshoe bat
through some intermediate species.
So it's like, let's say there's a bat
and that it infects some other animal.
Let's say it's a pig or a raccoon dog or a civet cat.
They're all pangolin.
They're all sorts of animals that have been considered.
And then that virus adapts into that new host
and it changes and grows.
And then according to the quote unquote
natural origins hypothesis,
it jumps from that animal into humans.
And so what you could imagine,
and some of the people who are making the case,
all of the people actually who are making the case
for a natural origin of the virus,
what they're saying is it went from bat
to some intermediate species.
And then from that intermediate species, most likely,
there's some people who say it went directly bat to human,
but through some intermediate species.
And then humans interacted with that species.
And then it jumped from that whatever it is to humans.
And that's a very plausible theory.
It's just that there's no evidence for it.
And the nature of the interaction is,
do most people kind of suggest this at the wet markets?
So the interaction of the humans with the animal
is in the form of it's either a live animal
as being sold to be eaten or a recently live animal,
but newly dead animal being sold to.
That's certainly one very possible possibility,
a possible possibility, I don't know if that's a word.
But the people who believe in the wet market origin,
that's what they're saying.
So they had one of these animals,
they were cutting it up, let's say, in a market.
And maybe some of the blood got into somebody,
maybe had a cut on their hand,
or maybe it was aerosolized.
And so somebody breathed it.
And then that virus found this new host,
and that was the human host.
But you could also have that happen in, let's say, a farm.
So it's happened in the past that let's say
that there are farms, and because of human encroachment
into wild spaces, we're pushing our farms
and our animal farms further and further
into what used to be just natural habitats.
And so it's happened in the past, for example,
that there were bats roosting over pig pens
and the bat droppings went into the pig pens.
The viruses in those droppings infected the pigs
and then the pigs infected the humans.
And that's why it's a plausible theory.
It's just that there's basically no evidence for it.
If it was the case that SARS CoV2 comes
from this type of interaction,
as in most of the at least recent past outbreaks,
we'd see evidence of that.
Viruses are messy.
They're constantly undergoing Darwinian evolution
and they're changing.
And it's not that they're just ready for prime time,
ready to infect humans on day one.
Normally you can trace the viral evolution
prior to the time when it infects humans.
But for SARS CoV2, it just showed up on the scene
ready to infect humans.
And there's no history that anybody has found so far
of that kind of viral evolution.
With the first SARS, you could track it
by the genome sequencing that it was experimenting.
And SARS CoV2 was very, very stable,
meaning it had already adapted to humans
by the time it interacted with us.
Fully adapted.
So with SARS, there's a rapid evolution
when it first hooks onto a human.
Yeah, because it's trying.
Like a virus, its goal is to survive and replicate.
Yeah, no, it's true.
It's like, oh, we're going to try this.
Oh, that didn't work.
We'll try it exactly like a startup.
And so we don't see that.
And so there are some people who say, well, one hypothesis
is you have a totally isolated group of humans,
maybe in southern China, which is more than 1,000 miles away
from Wuhan.
And maybe they're doing their animal farming
right next to these areas where there
are these horseshoe bats.
And maybe in this totally isolated place
that no one's ever heard of, they're not connected
to any other place, one person gets infected.
And it doesn't spread to anybody else
because they're so isolated.
They're like, I don't know, I mean,
I can't even imagine that this is the case.
And then somebody gets in a car and drives all night
more than 1,000 miles through crappy roads to get to Wuhan.
It doesn't stop for anything.
It doesn't infect anybody on the way.
No one else in that person's village infects anyone.
And then that person goes straight to the Huanan seafood
market, according to this, in my mind, not very credible
theory, and then unloads his stuff
and everybody gets infected.
And they're only delivering those animals
to the Wuhan market, which doesn't even
sell very many of these kinds of animals that
are likely intermediate species and not to anywhere else.
So that means a little bit of a straw man.
But on top of that, the Chinese have sequenced more than 80,000
animal samples.
And there's no evidence of this type of viral evolution
that we would otherwise expect.
Let's try to, at this moment, steal
man the argument for the natural origin of the virus.
So just to clarify, so Wuhan is actually,
despite what it might sound like to people,
is a pretty big city.
There's a lot of people that live in it.
11 million.
So not only is there the Wuhan Institute of Virology,
there's other centers that do work on viruses.
But there's also a giant number of markets.
And everything we're talking about here
is pretty close together.
So when I look at the geography of this,
I think when you zoom out, it's all Wuhan.
But when you zoom in, there's just
a lot of interesting dynamics that could be happening
and where the cases are popping up
and what's being reported, all that kind of stuff.
So I think the people that argue for the natural origin,
and there's a few recent papers that come out arguing this,
it's kind of fascinating to watch this whole thing.
But I think what they're arguing is
that there's this Hunan market, that's
one of the major markets, the wet markets in Wuhan,
that there's a bunch of cases that were reported from there.
So if I look at, for example, the Michael Warraby
perspective that he wrote in Science,
he argues, he wrote this a few days ago,
the predominance of early COVID cases linked to Hunan
market, and this can't be dismissed as ascertainment
bias, which I think is what people
argue that you're just kind of focusing on this region,
because a lot of cases came.
There could be a huge number of other cases.
So people who argue against this say
that this is a later stage already.
So he says no.
He says this is the epicenter, and this
is a clear circumstantial evidence,
but evidence, nevertheless, that this
is where the jump happened to humans, the big explosion.
Maybe not K0, I don't know if he argues that,
but with the early cases.
So what do you make of this whole idea?
Can you steel man it before you talk about the other?
And my goal here isn't to attack people on the other side,
and my feeling is if there is evidence that's presented
that should change my view, I hope
that I'll be open minded enough to change my view.
And certainly Michael Warraby is a thoughtful person,
a respected scientist, and I think this work
is contributive work, but I just
don't think that it's as significant as has
been reported in the press.
And so what his argument is is that there
is an early cluster in December of 2019
around the Huanan seafood market.
And even though he himself argues
that the original breakthrough case, the original case,
the index case where the first person infected
happened earlier, happened in October or November.
So not in December.
His argument is, well, what are the odds
that you would have this number, this cluster of cases
in the Huanan seafood market?
And if the origin happened someplace else,
wouldn't you expect other clusters?
And it's not an entirely implausible argument.
But there are reasons why I think
this is not nearly as determinative as has been reported.
And I certainly had a lot of, I and others,
had tweeted a lot about this.
And that is first, the people who
were infected in this cluster, it's not
the earliest known virus of the SARS CoV2.
It began mutating.
So it's not the original SARS CoV2 there.
So it had to have happened someplace else, too.
The people who were infected in the market
weren't infected in the part of the market
where they had these kinds of animals
that are considered to be candidates
as an intermediary species.
And third, there was a bias, actually, I'll have four things.
Third, there was a bias in the early assessment in China
of what they were looking for.
But they were asked, did you have exposure to the market?
Because I think in the early days when people were figuring
things out, that was one of the questions that was asked.
And fourth, and probably most significantly,
we have so little information about those early cases in China.
And that's really unfortunate.
And we'll talk about this later because the Chinese government
is preventing access to all of that information, which they
have, which could easily help us get to the bottom, at least
know a ton more about how this pandemic started.
And so it's like grasping at straws in the dark with gloves on.
That's right.
But to steal man the argument, we have this evidence
from this market.
And yes, the Chinese government has turned off the lights,
essentially.
So we have very little data to work with.
But this is the data we have.
So who's to say that this data doesn't represent a much bigger
data set that a lot of people got infected at this market
with it, even at the parts, or especially at the parts
with the meat, the infected meat was being sold?
So that could be true.
And it probably is true.
The question is, is this the source?
Is this the place where this began?
Or was this just a place where it was amplified?
And I certainly think that it's extremely likely
that the Huanan seafood market was
an at point of amplification.
And it's just answering a different question.
Basically, what you're saying is it's
very difficult to use the market as evidence for anything
because it's probably not even the starting point.
So it's just a good place for it to continue spreading.
That's certainly my view.
What Michael Warraby's argument is that, well,
what are the odds of that?
That we're seeing this amplification in the market.
And let me put it this way.
If we had all of the information, if the Chinese government
hadn't blocked access to all of this,
because there's blood bank information,
there's all sorts of information, and based
on a full and complete understanding,
we came to believe that all of the early cases
were at this market.
I think that would be a stronger argument than what
this is so far.
But everything leads to the fact that, why is it
that the Chinese government, which was, frankly,
after a slow start, the gold standard
of doing viral tracking for SARS 1,
why have they apparently done so little and shared so little?
I think it begs a lot of questions.
OK, so let's then talk about the Chinese government.
There's several governments, right?
So one is the local government of Wuhan.
And not just the Chinese government.
Let's talk about government.
No, let's talk about human nature.
Let's just keep zooming out.
Let's talk about planet Earth.
No.
So there's the Wuhan local government.
There's the Chinese government led by Xi Jinping.
And there's governments in general.
I'm trying to empathize.
So my father was involved with Chernobyl.
I'm trying to put myself into the mind of local officials,
of people who are like, oh, shit, there's
a potential catastrophic event happening here.
And it's my ass because there's incompetence all over the place.
Human nature is such that there's incompetence all over the place.
And you're always trying to cover it up.
And so given that context, I want
to lay out all the possible incompetence,
all the possible malevolence, all the possible geopolitical
tensions here.
All right.
Where in your sense did the cover up start?
So there's this suspicious fact.
It seems like that the Wuhan Institute of Virology
had a public database of thousands
of sampled bad coronavirus sequences.
And that went offline in September of 2019.
What's that about?
So let me talk about that specific.
And then I'll also follow your path of zooming out.
And it's a really important.
Is that a good starting point?
It's a great starting point.
Yeah, yeah.
So but there's a bigger story.
But let me talk about that.
So the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
And we can go into the whole history of the Wuhan
Institute of Virology, either now or later,
because I think it's very relevant to the story.
But let's focus for now on this database.
They had a database of 22,000 viral samples and sequence
information about viruses that they had collected,
some of which, the collection of some of which
was supported through funding from the NIH.
Not a huge NIH through the EcoHealth Alliance.
It's a relatively small amount, $600,000, but not nothing.
The goal of this database was so that we could understand
viral evolution so that, exactly for this kind of moment
where we had an unknown virus, we
could say, well, is this like anything
that we've seen before?
And that would help us both understand what we're facing
and be better able to respond.
So this was a password protected public access database.
In 2019, in September 2019, it became inaccessible.
And then the whole, a few months later,
the entire database disappeared.
What the Chinese have said is that because there were
all kinds of computer attacks on this database,
but why would that happen in September 2019
before the pandemic, at least as far as we know?
So just to clarify.
Yes.
It went down to September 2019, just
so we get the year straight.
January 2020 is when the virus really
started getting the press.
So we're talking about December 2019.
A lot of early infections happened.
September 2019 is when this database goes down.
Just to clarify, because you said it quickly,
the Chinese government said that their database
was getting hacked, therefore the director of this part
of the Wuhan Institute of Virology said that.
Oh, she was the one that said it.
She was the one who said it.
Oh, boy.
I did not even know that part.
Yeah.
Well, she's an interesting character.
We'll talk about her.
Yeah.
So the excuse is that it's getting cyberattacked a lot.
So we're going to take it down without any further explanation,
which seems very suspicious.
And then this virus starts to emerge in October, November,
December.
There's a lot of argument about that, but after.
Sorry to interrupt, but some people
are saying that the first outbreak could have
happened as early as September.
I think it's more likely it's October, November.
But for the people who are saying that the first outbreak,
the first incident of a known outbreak, at least to somebody,
happened in September, they make the argument, well,
what if that also happened in mid September of 2019?
I'm not prepared to go there, but there are some people
who make that argument.
But I think, again, if I were to put myself
in the mind of officials, whether it's officials within the Wuhan
Institute of Virology or Wuhan local officials,
I think if I notice some major problem,
like somebody got sick, some sign of, oh, shit, we screwed up.
That's when you kind of do the slow,
there's like a Homer Simpson meme,
where you slowly start backing out.
And I would probably start hiding stuff.
CYA, yeah.
Yeah, and then coming up with really shady excuses.
It's like you're in a relationship
and your girlfriend wants to see your phone.
And you're like, I'm sorry, I'm just getting
attacked by the Russians now.
The cybersecurity issue.
I can't.
Yeah, I wish I could.
I wish I could.
It's just unsafe right now.
So would it be OK if I give you my kind of macro view
of the whole information space and why I believe
this has been so contentious?
So here's if I had to give my best guess,
and I underline the word guess of what happened.
And your background, your family background with Chernobyl,
I think is highly relevant here.
So after the first SARS, there was a recognition
that we needed to distribute knowledge about virology
and epidemiology around the world.
The people in China and Africa and Southeast Asia,
they were the frontline workers.
And they needed to be doing a lot of the viral monitoring
and assessment so that we could have an early alarm system.
And that was why there was a lot of investment
in all of those places in building capacity and training
people and helping to build institutional capacity.
And the Chinese government, they recognized
that they needed to ramp things up.
And then the World Health Organization
and the World Health Assembly, they
had their international health regulations
that were designed to create a stronger infrastructure.
So that was the goal.
There were a lot of investments.
And I know we'll talk later about the Wuhan Institute
of Virology.
I won't go into that right now.
So there was all of this distributed capacity.
And so in the early days, there's a breakout in Wuhan.
We don't know is it September, October, November.
Maybe December is when the local authorities
start to recognize that something's happening.
But at some point in late 2019, local officials in Wuhan
understand that something is up.
And exactly like in Chernobyl, these guys
exist within a hierarchical system.
And they are going to be rewarded if good things happen.
And they're going to be in big trouble if bad things happen
under their watch.
So their initial instinct is to squash it.
My guess is they think, well, if we squash this information,
we can most likely beat back this outbreak,
because lots of outbreaks happen all the time,
including of SARS 1, where there was multiple lab incidents
out of a lab in Beijing.
And so they start their cover up on day one.
They start screening social media.
They send nasty letters to different doctors and others
who are starting to speak up.
But then it becomes clear that there's a bigger issue.
And then the national government of China.
Again, this is just a hypothesis.
The national government gets involved.
They say, all right, this is getting much bigger.
They go in and they realize that we
have a big problem on our hands.
They relatively quickly know that it's
spreading human to human.
And so the right thing for them to do then
is what the South African government is doing now
is to say, we have this outbreak.
We don't know everything, but we know it's serious.
We need help.
But that's not the instinct of people in most governments,
and certainly not in authoritarian governments
like China.
And so the national government, they have a choice at that point.
They can do option one, which is what we would hear
called the right thing, which is total transparency.
They criticize the local officials
for having this cover up.
And they say, now we're going to be totally transparent.
But what does that do in a system like the former Soviet
Union, like China now?
If local officials say, wait a second,
I thought my job was to cover everything up,
to support this alternative reality that authoritarian systems
need in order to survive, well, now
I'm going to be held accountable for if I'm not totally
transparent, like your whole system would collapse.
So the national government, they have that choice.
And their only choice, according to the logic of their system,
is to be all in on a cover up.
And that's why they block the World Health Organization
from sending its team to Wuhan for over three weeks.
They overtly lie to the World Health Organization
about human to human transmission.
And then they begin their cover up.
So they begin very, very quickly destroying samples,
hiding records.
They start imprisoning people for asking basic questions.
Soon after, they establish a gag order,
preventing Chinese scientists from writing or saying anything
about pandemic origins without prior government approval.
And what that does means that there isn't a lot of data,
there's not nearly enough data coming out of China.
And so lots of responsible scientists
outside of China who are data driven say, well,
I don't have enough information to draw conclusions.
And then into that vacuum, step a relatively small number
of largely virologists, but also others, respected
scientists, and I know we'll talk about the, I think,
infamous Peter Dezak, who say, well,
without any real foundation in the evidence,
they say, we know pretty much this comes from nature.
And anyone who's raising the possibility of a lab incident
origin is a conspiracy theorist.
So that message starts to percolate.
And then in the United States, we have Donald Trump.
And he's starting to get criticized for America's
failure to respond, prepare for, and respond adequately
to the outbreak.
And so he starts saying, well, I know, first,
after praising Xi Jinping, he starts saying, well,
I know that China did it, and the WHO did it,
and he's kind of pointing fingers at everybody but himself.
And then we have a media here that
had shifted from the traditional model of,
he said, she said, journalism.
So and so said X, and so and so said Y,
and then we'll present both of those views.
With Donald Trump, he would make outlandish,
starting positions.
So he would say, Lex is an axe murderer.
And then in the early days, they would say,
Lex is an axe murderer.
Lex's friend says he's not an axe murderer.
We'd have a four day debate, is he or isn't he?
And then at day four, someone would say,
why are we having this debate at all?
Because the original point is baseless.
And so the media just got in the habit.
Here's what Trump said, and here's why it's wrong.
It's very complicated to figure out
what is the role of a politician,
what is the role of a leader in this kind of game of politics.
But certainly when there's a tragedy,
when there's a catastrophic event,
what it takes to be a leader is to see clearly through the fog
and to make big, bold decisions
that does speak to the truth of things.
And even if it's unpopular truth,
to listen to the people, to listen to all sides,
to the opinions, to the controversial ideas,
and to see past all the bullshit,
all the political bullshit,
and just speak to the people,
speak to the world and make bold, big decisions.
That's probably what was needed in terms of leadership.
And I'm not so willing to criticize
whether it's Joe Biden or Donald Trump on this.
I think most people cannot be great leaders,
but that's why when great leaders step up,
we write books about them.
And I agree.
And even though, I think of myself as a progressive person,
I certainly was a critic of a lot of what President Trump did.
But on this particular case,
even though he may have said it in an uncouth way,
Donald Trump was actually, in my view, right.
I mean, when he said, hey, let's look at this lab,
I mean, he said, I have evidence, I can't tell you,
I don't think he even had the evidence.
But his intuition that this probably comes from a lab,
in my view, was a correct intuition.
And certainly I started speaking up
about pandemic origins early in 2019.
And my friends, my Democratic friends,
were brutal with me saying, what are you doing?
You're supporting Trump in an election year.
And I said, just because Donald Trump is saying something
doesn't mean that I need to oppose it.
If Donald Trump says something that I think is correct,
well, I wanna say it's correct
just as if he says something that I don't like,
I'm gonna speak up about that.
Good, you walked through the fire.
So that's, you laid out the story here.
And I think in many ways it's a human story.
It's a story of politics, it's a story of human nature.
But let's talk about the story of the virus.
And let's talk about the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
So maybe this is a good time to try to talk about
his history, about his origins,
about what kind of stuff it works on,
about biosafety levels, and about that woman.
Yeah, Xu Zhengli, yes.
Xu Zhengli.
So what is the Wuhan Institute of Virology
when did it start?
Yeah, so it's a great question.
So after SARS 1, which was in the early 2000, 2003, 2004,
there was this effort to enhance,
as I mentioned before, global capacity,
including in China.
So the Wuhan Institute of Virology
had been around for decades before then.
But there was an agreement between the French
and the Chinese governments to build
the largest BSL4 lab, so biosafety level four.
So in these, what are called high containment labs,
there's level four, which is the highest level.
And people have seen that on TV and elsewhere,
where you have the people in the different suits
and all of these protections.
And then there's level three,
which is still very serious but not as much as level four.
And then level two is just kind of goggles and some gloves
and maybe a face mask, much less.
So the French and the Chinese governments
agreed that France would help build the first
and still the largest BSL4,
plus some mobile BSL3 labs.
And they were going to do it in Wuhan.
And Wuhan is kind of like China's Chicago.
And I had actually been, it's a different story,
I'd been in Wuhan relatively not that long
before the pandemic broke out.
And that was why I knew that Wuhan is,
it's not some backwater where there are a bunch
of yokels eating bats for dinner every night.
This is a really sophisticated, wealthy,
highly educated and cultured city.
And so I knew that it wasn't like
that even the Huanan seafood market
wasn't like some of these seafood markets
that they have in Southern China or in Cambodia
where I lived for two years.
I mean, this, it was a totally different thing.
I'm gonna have to talk to you about some of the food,
including Wuhan market,
just some of the wild food going on here
because you've traveled that part of the world.
Well, let's not get there, let's not get distracted.
Good, as I was telling you Lex before,
and this is maybe an advertisement,
is having now listened to a number of your podcasts
and I'm doing long, ultra training runs
or driving in the mountains.
Like the really, because in the beginning,
we have to talk about whatever it is, is the topic,
but the really good stuff happens later, so.
So friends, you should listen to the end.
I have to say, as I was telling you before,
like when I heard your long podcast with Geron Lanier
and he talked about his mother at the very end,
I mean, just beautiful stuff.
So I don't know whether I can match beautiful stuff
but I'm gonna do my best.
You're gonna have to find out.
Exactly, stay tuned.
So France had this agreement
that they were going to help design and help build
this BSL4 lab in Wuhan.
And it was going to be with French standards
and there were going to be 50 French experts
who were going to work there
and supervise the work that happened
even after the Wuhan Institute of Virology
in the new location started operating.
But then when they started building it,
the French contractors, the French overseers
were increasingly appalled
that they had less and less control,
that the Chinese contractors were swapping out new things,
it wasn't built up to French standards,
so much that at the end when it was finally built,
the person who was the vice chairman of the project
and a leading French industrialist named Mario
refused to sign off.
And he said, we can't support, we have no idea
what this is, whether it's safe or not.
And when this lab opened,
remember we were supposed to have 50 French experts,
it had one French expert.
And so the French were really disgusted.
And actually when the Wuhan Institute of Virology
in its new location opened in 2018, two things happened.
One, French intelligence privately approached US intelligence
saying we have a lot of concerns
about the Wuhan Institute of Virology,
about its safety, and we don't even know
who's operating there, is it being used
as a dual use facility.
And also in 2018, the US embassy in Beijing
sent some people down to Wuhan to go and look at,
well, at this laboratory.
And they wrote a scathing cable that Josh Rogan
from the Washington Post later got his hands on
saying this is really unsafe,
they're doing work on dangerous bat coronaviruses
in conditions where a leak is possible.
And so then you mentioned Xuejing Li,
and I'll connect that to these virologists
who I was talking about.
So there's a very credible thesis
that because these pathogenic outbreaks happen
in other parts of the world,
having partnerships with experts
in those parts of the world
must be a foundation of our efforts.
We can't just bring everything home
because we know that viruses don't care
about borders and boundaries.
And so if something happens there,
it's going to come here.
So very correctly, we have all kinds of partnerships
with experts in these labs.
And Xuejing Li was one of those partners.
And her closest relationship was with Peter Dezak,
who's a British, I think now American,
but the president of a thing called EcoHealth Alliance,
which was getting money from NIH.
And basically EcoHealth Alliance was a pass through
organization and over the years,
it was only about $600,000.
So almost all of her funding came from the Chinese government,
but there's a little bit that came from the United States.
And so she became their kind of leading expert
and the point of contact
between the Wuhan Institute of Virology
and certainly Peter Dezak, but also with others.
And that was why in the earliest days of the outbreak,
I didn't mention that,
and I did mention that there were these virologists
who had this fake certainty that they knew it came from nature
and it didn't come from a lab.
And they called people like me conspiracy theorists
just for raising that possibility.
But when Peter Dezak was organizing that effort
in February of 2020, what he said is,
we need to rally behind our Chinese colleagues.
And the basic idea was these international collaborations
are under threat.
And I think it was because of that,
because Peter Dezak's basically his major contribution
as a scientist was just tacking his name on work
that Xu Zhengli had largely done.
He was defending a lot certainly for himself
and his organization.
So you think EcoHealth Alliance and Peter
is less about money.
It's more about kind of almost like legacy
because you're so attached to this work.
Is it just on a human level?
So I think so.
I mean, I've been criticized for being actually,
I'm certainly a big critic of Peter Dezak,
but I've been criticized by some for being too lenient.
I mean, it's so easy to say, oh, somebody,
they're like an evil ogre and just trying to do evil
and cackling in their closet or whatever.
But I think for most of us, even those of us
who do terrible, horrible things,
the story that we tell ourselves
and we really believe is that we're doing the thing
that we most believe in.
I mean, I did my PhD dissertation
on the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia.
They genuinely saw themselves as idealists.
They thought, well, we need to make radical change
to build a better future.
And what they described is that they felt
was radical change was a monstrous atrocity by us.
So the criticism here of Peter is that
he was part of an organization that was kind of,
well, funding an effort that was an unsafe implementation
of a biosafety level for laboratory.
Well, a few things.
So what he thought he was doing was,
and then what he thought he was doing
is itself highly controversial
because there's one that in 2011,
there were, I know you've talked about this
with other guests, but in 2011,
there were the first published papers
on this now infamous gain of function research.
And basically what they did,
both in different labs,
and certainly in the United States,
in Wisconsin and in the Netherlands,
was they had a bird flu virus that was very dangerous
but not massively transmissive.
And they had a gain of function process
through what's called serial passage,
which means basically passing advice
like natural selection, but forcing natural selection
by just passing a virus through different cell cultures
and then selecting for what it is that you want.
So relatively easily, they took this deadly
but not massively transmissive virus
and turned it into in a lab,
a deadly and transmissive virus.
And that showed that this is really dangerous.
And so there were, at that point,
there was a huge controversy.
There were some people like Richard Ebright
and Mark Lipsitch at Harvard
who were saying that this is really dangerous.
We're in the idea that we need to create monsters
to study monsters.
I think maybe even you have said that in the past,
it doesn't make sense
because there's an unlimited number of monsters.
And so what are we gonna do?
Create an unlimited number of monsters.
And if we do that, eventually the monsters
are going to get out.
Then there was the Peter Desick camp
and he got a lot of funding,
particularly from the United States,
who said, well, and certainly Collins and Fauci
were supportive of this.
And they thought, well, there's a safe way
to go out into the world,
to collect the world's most dangerous viruses
and to poke and prod them to figure out
how they might mutate,
how they might become more dangerous
with the goal of predicting future pandemics.
And that certainly never happened
with the goal of creating vaccines and treatments.
And that largely never happened.
But that was, so Peter Desick kind of epitomized
that second approach.
And as you've talked about in the past, in 2014,
there was a funding moratorium in the United States.
And then in 2017, that was lifted.
It didn't affect the funding
that went to the EcoHealth Alliance.
So when this happened in the beginning,
and again, coming back to Peter's motivations,
I don't think, here's the best case scenario for Peter.
I'm gonna give you what I imagine he was thinking,
and then I'll tell you what I actually think.
So I think here's what he's thinking.
This is most likely a natural origin outbreak.
It just like SARS 1, again, in Peter's hypothetical mind,
just like SARS 1, this is most likely a natural outbreak.
We need to have an international coalition
in order to fight it.
If we allow these political attacks
to undermine our Chinese counterparts
and the trust in these relationships
that we've built over many years,
we're really screwed because they have
the most local knowledge of these outbreaks.
And even though, and this gets a lot more complicated,
even though there are basic questions
that anybody would ask,
and that Xu Zhengli herself did ask
about the origins of this pandemic,
even though Peter Dezak, and I'll describe this in a moment,
had secret information that we didn't have,
that in my mind massively increases the possibility
of a lab incident origin,
I, Peter Dezak, would like to guide
the public conversation in the direction
where I think it should go,
and in support of the kind of international collaboration
that I think is necessary.
That's a strong positive discussion
because it's true that there's a lot of political BS
and a lot of kind of just bickering
and lies as we've talked about.
And so it's very convenient to say, you know what?
Let's just ignore all of these quote unquote lies
and my favorite word, misinformation.
And then because the way out from this serious pandemic
is for us to work together.
So let's strengthen our partnerships
and everything else is just like noise.
Yeah, so let's,
and so then now I wanna do my personal indictment
of Peter Dezak because that's my view,
but I wanted to fairly,
because I think that we all tell ourselves stories
and also when you're a science communicator,
you can't in your public communications
give every doubt that you have or every nuance.
You kind of have to summarize things.
And so I think that he was, again,
in this benign interpretation,
trying to summarize in the way
that he thought the conversations should go.
Here's my indictment of Peter Dezak.
And I feel like Brutus here,
but I've not come here to praise Peter Dezak
because while Peter Dezak was doing all of this
and making all of these statements
about, well, we pretty much know it's a natural origin,
then there was this February 2020 Lancet letter
where it turns out, and we only knew this later,
that he was highly manipulative.
So he was recruiting all of these people.
He drafted the infamous letter
calling people like me conspiracy theorists.
He then wrote to people like Ralph Barrick and Linfa Wang
who are also very high profile virologists saying,
well, let's not put our names on it.
So it doesn't look like we're doing it
even though they were doing it.
He didn't disclose a lot of information that they had.
It was a strategic move.
So just in case people are not familiar,
February 2020 Lancet letter was TLDR
is a lab leak hypothesis is a conspiracy theory.
Essentially, yes.
So like with the authority of science,
not saying like it's highly likely,
saying it's obvious duh, it's natural origin,
everybody else is just,
everything else is just misinformation.
And look, there's a bunch of really smart people
that sign this, therefore it's true.
Yeah, not only that, so there were the people
who's 27 people signed that letter.
And then after President Trump cut funding
to EcoHealth Alliance, then he organized 77 Nobel laureates
to have a public letter criticizing that.
But what Peter knew then that we didn't fully know
is that in March of 2018, EcoHealth Alliance,
in partnership with the Wuhan Institute of Virology
and others had applied for a $14 million grant to DARPA,
which is kind of like the VC side of the venture capital side
of the Defense Department.
They're kind of where they do kind of big ideas.
Oh, by the way, as a tiny tangent,
I've gotten a lot of funding from DARPA.
They fund a lot of excellent robotics research.
And DARPA is incredible.
And among the things that they applied for is that we,
meaning Wuhan Institute of Virology is gonna go
and it's gonna collect the most dangerous
bat coronaviruses in Southern China.
And then we, as this group,
are going to genetically engineer these viruses
to insert a furan cleavage site.
So I think when everyone's now seen the image
of the SARS CoV2 virus,
it has these little spike proteins,
these little things that stick out,
which is why they call it a coronavirus.
Within that spike protein are these furan cleavage sites
which basically help with the virus
getting access into our cells.
And they're going to genetically engineer
these furan cleavage sites into these bat coronaviruses,
the serbicoviruses.
And then, and so then a year and a half later,
what do we see?
We see a bat coronaviruses with a furan cleavage site
unlike anything that we've ever seen before
in that category of SARS like coronaviruses.
That, well, yes.
I mean, the DARPA very correctly
didn't support that application.
Well, that's actually, that's like a pause on that.
So for a lot of people that's like the smoking gun.
Yeah.
Okay, let's talk about this 2018 proposal to DARPA.
So I guess who's drafted the proposal?
Is it?
EcoHealth.
EcoHealth, but the proposal is to do,
so EcoHealth is technically a US funded organization.
Primarily.
And then the idea was to do work at Wuhan Institute
of Virology.
With, yeah.
So it was.
With EcoHealth.
Yeah.
So EcoHealth basically that the Wuhan Institute
of Virology was gonna go and they were gonna
collect these viruses and store them
at Wuhan Institute of Virology.
But they're also gonna do the actual.
According, it's a really important point.
According to their proposal,
the actual work was going to be done
at the lab of Ralph Barrick
at the University of North Carolina
who's probably the world's leading expert
on coronaviruses.
And so we know that DARPA didn't fund that work.
We know, I think quite well,
that Ralph Barrick's lab in part,
because it was not funded by DARPA,
they didn't do that specific work.
What we don't know is, well,
what work was done at the Wuhan Institute of Virology
because WIV was part of this proposal.
They had access to all of the plans.
They had done, they had their own capacity
and they had already done a lot of work
in genetically altering this exact category of viruses
they had created, chimeric mixed viruses they had done.
They had mastered pretty much all of the steps
in order to achieve this thing
that they applied for funding with EcoHealth to do.
And so the question is,
did the Wuhan Institute of Virology
go through with that research anyway?
And in my mind, that's a very, very real possibility.
We certainly explain why they're giving no information.
And as you know, I've been a member
of the World Health Organization Expert Advisory Committee
on Human Genome Editing,
which Dr. Tedros created in the aftermath
of the announcement of the world's first CRISPR babies.
And it was just basically the exact same story.
So Hojong Kui, Chinese scientist,
it was not a first tier scientist,
but a perfectly adequate second tier scientist
came to the United States,
learned all of these capacities, went back to China
and said, well, there's a much more permissive environment.
I'm gonna be a world leader,
I'm gonna establish both myself and China.
So in every scientific field,
we're seeing this same thing
where you kind of learn a model
and then you do it in China.
So is it possible that the Wuhan Institute of Virology
with this exact game plan was doing it anyway?
Do we possible?
We have no clue what work was being done
at the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
It seems extremely likely
that at the Wuhan Institute of Virology,
and this is certainly the US government position,
there was the work that was being done in Dr. Xu's lab,
but that wasn't the whole WIV.
We know, at least according to the United States government,
that there was the Chinese military,
that PLA was doing work there.
Were they doing this kind of work,
not to create a bio weapon,
but in order to understand these viruses,
maybe to develop vaccines and treatments,
it seems like a very, very logical possibility.
And then, so we know that the Wuhan Institute of Virology
had all of the skills,
we know that they were part of this proposal.
And then you have Peter Dezak, who knows all of this,
that at that time in February of 2020, we didn't know.
But then he comes swinging out of the gate,
saying anybody who's raising this possibility
of a lab incident origin is a conspiracy theorist.
I mean, it really makes him look, in my mind, very, very bad.
Yet not to at least be somewhat open minded on this,
because he knows all the details.
He knows that it's not 0%.
I mean, there's no way in his mind could even argue that.
So it's potential because of the bias, because of your focus.
I mean, it could be the Anthony Fauci mask thing,
whereas he knows there's some significant probability
that this is happening.
But in order to preserve good relations
with our Chinese colleagues,
we want to make sure we tell a certain kind of narrative.
So it's not really lying.
It's doing the best possible action at this time
to help the world.
Not that this already happened.
But that's how like...
Yeah, I think it's quite likely that that was the story
that he was telling himself.
But it's that lack of transparency in my mind is fraudulent,
that we were struggling to understand something
that we didn't understand.
And that I just think that people who possess
that kind of information, especially when the existence,
like the entire career of Peter Dezak,
is based on US taxpayers, there's a debt that comes with that.
And that debt is honesty and transparency.
And for all of us, and you talked about your girlfriend
checking your phone, for all of us,
being honest and transparent in the most difficult times,
it's really difficult.
If it were easy, everybody would do it.
And I just feel that Peter was the opposite of transparent
and then went on the offensive.
And then had the gall of joining,
I know we can talk about this,
this highly compromised joint study process with the international experts
and their Chinese government counterparts.
And used that as a way of furthering this, in my mind,
fraudulent narrative that it almost certainly came from natural origins
and a lab origin was extremely unlikely.
Just to stick briefly on the proposal to wrap that up,
because I do think in a kind of John Stuart way,
if you heard that a bit,
he sort of kind of like, common sense way.
The 2018 proposal to DARPA from EcoHealth Alliance
and Wuhan Institute of Virology,
just seems like a bit of a surprise to me.
It just seems like a bit of a smoking gun to me, like that.
So there's this excellent book that people should read called Viro,
The Search for the Origin of COVID 19.
Matt Ridley and Alina Chan, I think Alina is in MIT.
She's at the Broad Institute.
So I heard her in an interview, give this analogy of unicorns
and where basically somebody writes a proposal to add horns to horses.
The proposal is rejected.
And then a couple of years later, a year later, a unicorn shows up.
In the place where they're proposing to do it.
And then everyone was like, it's natural origin.
It's like, it's possible it's natural origin.
We haven't detected a unicorn yet,
it's the first time we've detected a unicorn.
Or it could be this massive organization that was planning, is fully equipped,
has like a history of being able to do this stuff,
has the world experts to do it, has the funding, has the motivation
to add horns to horses.
And now a unicorn shows up and they're saying, no, definitely natural.
That connects to your first question of how do I get to my 85%
and here's a summary of that answer.
And so it's what I said in my 60 minutes interview a long time ago
of all the gin joints in all the towns in all the world,
the quote from Casablanca.
And so of all the places in the world where we have an outbreak
of a SARS like bat coronavirus,
it's not in the area of the natural habitat of the horseshoe bats.
It's the one city in China with the first and largest level four
virology lab, which actually wasn't even using it.
They were doing level three and level two for this work,
where they had the world's largest collection of bat coronaviruses,
where they were doing aggressive experiments designed to make these
scary viruses scarier, where they had been part of an application
to insert a furring cleavage site able to infect human cells.
And where when the outbreak happened, we had a virus that was ready
for action to infect humans and to this day better able to infect humans
than any other species, including bats.
And then from day one, there's this massive coverup.
And then on top of that, in spite of lots of efforts by lots of people,
there's basically no evidence for the natural origin hypothesis.
Everything that I've described just now is circumstantial,
but there's a certain point of where you add up the circumstances.
And you see, this seems pretty, pretty likely.
I mean, if we're getting to 100%, we are not at 100% by any means.
There still is a possibility of a natural origin.
And if we find that, great.
But from everything that I know, that's how I get to my 85.
And we'll talk about why this matters in the political sense
and the human sense in the science, in the realm of science, all of those factors.
But first, as Nietzsche said, let us look into the abyss
and the games we'll play with monsters that is colloquially called
gain of function research.
Let me ask the kind of political sounding question,
which is how people usually phrase it.
Did Anthony Fauci fund gain of function research
at the Wuhan Institute of Virology?
So it depends.
I mean, I've obviously been very closely monitoring this.
I've spoken a lot about it.
I've written about it.
And it depends on, I mean, not to quote Bill Clinton,
but to quote Bill Clinton, it depends on what the definition of is is.
And so if you use a common sense definition of gain of function,
and by gain of function, there are lots of things like gene therapies
that are gain of function.
But here, what we mean is gain of function for pathogens
able, potentially able to create human pandemics.
But if you use the kind of common sense language,
well, then he probably did.
If you use the technical language from a 2017 NIH document,
and you read that language very narrowly,
I think you can make a credible argument that he did not.
There's a question, though, and Francis Collins
talked about that in his interview with you.
But then there's a question that we know from now
that we have the information of the reports submitted
by EcoHealth Alliance to the NIH,
and some of which were late or not even delivered,
that some of this research was done on MERS,
Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome virus.
And if that was the case, there is, I think, a colorable argument
that that would be considered gain of function research
even by the narrow language of that 2017 document.
But I definitely think, and I've said this repeatedly,
that Rand Paul can be right, and Tony Fauci can be right.
And the question is, how are we defining gain of function?
And that's why I've always said the question in my mind
isn't was it or wasn't it gain of function,
as if that's like a binary thing, if not great,
and if yes, guilty.
The question is just, what work was being done
at the Wuhan Institute of Virology?
What role, if any, did U.S. government funding
play in supporting that work?
And what rights do we all have as human beings
and as American citizens and taxpayers
to get all of the relevant information about them?
So let's try to kind of dissect this.
So who frustrates you more, Rand Paul
or Anthony Fauci's discussion, or the discussion itself?
So for example, gain of function is a term
that's kind of more used just to mean
making, playing with viruses in one lab
to try to develop more dangerous viruses.
Is this kind of research a good idea?
Is it also a good idea for us to talk about it
in public, in the political way that it's been talked about?
Is it okay that U.S. may have funded
gain of function research elsewhere?
I mean, it's kind of assumed, just like with Bill Clinton,
there was very little discussion of, I think,
correct me if I'm wrong, but, you know,
whether it's okay for a president, male or female,
to have extramarital sex, okay?
Or is it okay for a president to have extramarital sex
with people on his staff or her staff?
It was more the discussion of lying, I think.
It was, did you lie about having sex or not?
And in this gain of function discussion,
what frustrates me personally is there's not
a deep philosophical discussion about whether
we should be doing this kind of research
and what kinds, like, what are the ethical lines?
Research on animals at all.
Those are fascinating questions.
Instead, it's a gotcha thing.
Did you or did you not fund research on gain of function?
And did you fund, it's almost like a bio weapon.
Did you give money to China to develop this bio weapon
that now attacked the rest of the world?
So, I mean, all those things are pretty frustrating,
but is there, I think the thing you can untangle
about Anthony Fauci and gain of function research
in the United States and equal health alliance
and Wuhan Institute of virology that's kind of,
that's clarifying, what were the mistakes made?
Sure.
So, on gain of function, there actually has been a lot
of debate, and I mentioned before in 2011,
these first papers, there was a big debate.
Mark Lipsitch, who's formerly at Harvard now
with the US government working in the president's office,
he led a thing called the Cambridge Group
that was highly critical of this work,
but basically saying we're creating monsters.
They had the funding pause in 2014.
They spent three years putting together a framework,
and then they lifted it in 2017.
So, we had a thoughtful conversation.
Unfortunately, it didn't work,
and I think that's where we are now.
So, I absolutely think that there are real issues
with the relationship between the United States government
and eco health alliance, and through that,
eco health alliance with the Wuhan Institute of virology.
And one issue is just essential transparency,
because as I see it, it's most likely the case
that we transferred a lot of our knowledge
and plans and things to the Wuhan Institute of virology.
And again, I'm sure that Xu Zhengli is not herself a monster.
I'm sure of that, even though I've never met her.
But there are just a different set of pressures on people
working in an authoritarian system
than people who are working in other systems.
That doesn't mean it's entirely different.
And so, I absolutely think that we shouldn't give one dollar
to an organization and certainly a virology institute
where you don't have full access to their records,
to their databases, we don't know what work is happening there.
And I think that we need to have that kind of full examination.
And that's why, so I understand what Dr. Fauci is doing,
is saying, hey, what I hear, Dr. Fauci saying,
what I hear from you, Rand Paul,
is you're accusing me of starting this pandemic
and you're using gain of function as a proxy for that.
And we have, when there are Senate hearings,
every Senator gets five minutes.
And the name of the game is to translate your five minutes
into a clip that's going to run on the news.
And so, I get that there is that kind of, gotcha.
But I also think that Dr. Fauci and the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and the NIH
should have been more transparent.
Because I think that in this day and age
where there are a lot of people poking around
in this whole story of COVID origins,
we would not be where we are if it wasn't
for a relatively small number of people.
And I'm part of, there are two, as I know, two groups.
One is these internet sleuths known as drastic.
And a number of them are part of a group that I'm part of called,
it's not our official name, but called the Paris Group.
It's about two dozen experts around the world,
but centered around some very high level French academics.
So we've all been digging and meeting with each other regularly
since last year.
And our governments across the board, certainly China,
but including the United States, haven't been as transparent
as they need to be.
So there's definitely mistakes were made on all sides.
And that's why, for me, from day one,
I've been calling for a comprehensive investigation
into this issue that certainly obviously looks at China.
But we have to look at ourselves.
We did not get this right.
So to you, I'm just going to put Rand Paul aside here.
He's a politician playing political games.
It's very frustrating, but it is what it is on all sides.
Anthony Fauci, you think should have been more transparent.
And maybe more eloquent in expressing the complexity
of all of this, the uncertainty in all of this.
Yeah.
And I get that it's really hard to do that,
because let's say you have one, you speak a paragraph,
and it's got four sentences.
And one of those sentences is the thing that's going to be turned
into Twitter.
Let me put it back.
I'll try not to be emotional about this,
but I've heard Anthony Fauci a couple of times now say
that he represents science.
I know what he means by that.
He means in the political bickering, all that kind of stuff,
that for a lot of people, he represents science.
But words matter.
And this isn't just clips.
I mean, maybe I'm distinctly aware of that doing this podcast.
Yeah, I talk for hundreds of hours now, maybe over 1,000 hours.
But I'm still careful with the words.
I'm trying not to be an asshole, and I'm aware when I'm an asshole
and I'll apologize for it.
If the words I represent science left my mouth,
which they very well could, I would sure as hell be apologizing
for it.
And not enough because I got in trouble.
I would just feel bad about saying something like that.
And even that little phrase, I represent science.
No, Dr. Fauci, you do not represent science.
I love science.
The millions of scientists that inspired me to get into it.
To fall in love with the scientific method in the exploration
of ideas through the rigor of science.
That Anthony Fauci does not represent.
He's one, I believe, great scientist of millions.
He does not represent anybody.
He's just one scientist.
And I think the greatness of a scientist is best exemplified
in humility because the scientific method basically says,
like, you're standing before the fog, the mystery of it all,
and slowly chipping away at the mystery.
And it's embarrassing.
It's humiliating how little you know.
That's the experience.
So the great scientists have to have humility to me.
And especially in their communication,
they have to have humility.
I don't know.
And some of it is also words matter because great leaders
have to have the poetry of action.
They have to be bold and inspire action across millions
of people.
But you also have to, through that poetry of words,
express the complexity of the uncertainty you're operating
under, be humble in the face of not being able to predict
the future or understand the past,
or really know what's the right thing to do,
but we have to do something.
And through that, you have to be a great leader
that inspires action.
Some of that is just words.
And he chose words poorly.
So I'm all torn about this.
And then there's politicians that are taking those words
and magnifying them and playing games with them.
And of course, that's a decent incentive for the people
who do the scientific leaders that step into the limelight
to say any more words.
So they kind of become more conservative
with the words they use.
I mean, it just becomes a giant mess.
And I think the solution is to ignore all of that
and to be transparent, to be honest, to be vulnerable,
and to express the full uncertainty of what you're operating under
to present all the possible actions
and to be honest about the mistakes they made in the past.
I mean, there's something, even if you're not directly responsible
for those mistakes, taking responsibility for them
is a way to win people over.
I don't think leaders realize this often in the modern age.
In the internet age, they can see through your bullshit.
And it's really inspiring when you take ownership,
sort of do the thought experiment in public,
do a thought experiment if there was a lab leak,
and then lay out all the funding, the EcoHealth Alliance,
all the incredible science going on
at the Wuhan Institute of Virology and the NIH.
Lay out all the possible ethical problems.
Lay out all the possible mistakes that could have been made
and say, like, this could have happened,
and if this happened, here's the best way to respond to it
and to prevent it in the future.
And just lay all that complexity out.
I mean, I wish we would have seen it.
And I have hope that this conversation,
conversations like at your work and books on this topic
will inspire young people today
when they become in the Anthony Fauci's role
to be much more transparent and much more humble
and all of those kinds of things,
that this is just a relic of the past.
When there's a person, no offense to me,
in a suit that has to stand up and speak
with clarity and certainty.
I mean, that's just a relic of the past.
This is my hope, but...
Do you mind if I...
Because I agree with a great deal of what you said,
and it's really unfortunate
that certainly the Chinese government,
as I said before, our government wasn't as transparent
as I feel they should have been,
particularly in the early days of the pandemic
and particularly with regard to the issue of pandemic origins.
I mean, we know that Dr. Fauci was on calls
with people like Christian Anderson at Scripps and others
in those early days raising questions,
is this an engineered virus?
There were a lot of questions.
And it's kind of sad.
I mean, as I mentioned before, I've been one,
and certainly there were others,
but there weren't a lot of us of the people
who from the earliest days of the pandemic
were raising questions about, hey, not so fast here.
And I launched my website on pandemic origins
in April of last year, April 2020.
It got a huge amount of attention.
And actually, my friend Matt Pottinger,
who was the deputy national security advisor,
when he was reaching out to people in the U.S. government
and in allied government saying,
hey, we should look into this,
what he was sending them was my website.
It wasn't some U.S. government information.
And by the way, people should still go to the website.
You keep getting, you keep updating it,
and it's an incredible resource.
Well, thank you. Thank you. JamieMetall.com.
And it's really unfortunate that our governments
and international institutions,
for pretty much all of 2020,
weren't doing their jobs of really probing this issue.
People were hiding behind this kind of false consensus.
And I'm critical of many people,
even when I heard Francis Collins interview with you.
I just felt, well, he wasn't as balanced
on the issue of COVID origins.
Certainly Dr. Fauci could have,
in his conversation with Rand Paul,
it wasn't even a conversation,
but in some process in the aftermath,
could have laid things out a bit better.
He did say, and Francis Collins did say,
that we don't know the origins, and that was a shift.
And we need to have an investigation.
So now, but having said all of that,
I do kind of, one, I have tremendous respect
for Dr. Fauci for the work that he's done on HIV AIDS.
I mean, I have been vaccinated with the Moderna vaccine.
Dr. Fauci was a big part of the story
of getting us these vaccines
that have saved millions and millions of lives.
And so I don't think, I mean, there's a lot to this story.
And then the second thing is it's really hard
to be a public health expert because you have,
your mission is public health.
And so, and you have to, if you are leading
with all of your uncertainty,
it's a really hard way to do things.
And so like even now, like if I go to CVS
and I get a Tylenol, somebody has done a calculation
of how many people will die from taking Tylenol.
And they say, well, all right, we can live with that.
And that's why we have regulation.
And so all of us are doing kind of summaries.
And then we have people in public health who are saying,
well, we've summed it all up and you should do it.
You should get your kids vaccinated for measles.
You should not drive your car at 100 miles an hour.
You should don't drink lighter fluid,
whatever these things are.
And we want them to kind of give us broad guidelines
and yet now our information world is so fragmented
that if you're not being honest about something,
something material, someone's going to find out
and it's going to undermine your credibility.
And so I agree with you that there's a greater requirement
for transparency now.
Maybe there always has been,
but there's an even greater requirement for it now
because people want to trust that you're speaking honestly
and that you're saying, well, here's what I know.
And this is based on what I know.
Here are the conclusions that I draw.
But if it's just, and again, I don't think the words
I'm science or whatever it was are the right words.
But if it's just, you know, trust me because of who I am,
I don't think that flies anywhere anymore.
Can I just ask you about the Francis Collins interview
that I did?
If you got a chance to hear that part,
I think in the beginning we talk about the loud leak.
What are your thoughts about his response?
Basically saying it's worthy of an investigation,
but I mean, I don't know how you would interpret it.
See, it's funny because I heard it in the moment
as it's great for the head of NIH to be open minded on this.
But then the internet and Mr. Joe Rogan and a bunch of friends
and colleagues told me that, yeah, well, that's too late
and too little.
Yeah, so first let me say I've been on Joe's podcast twice
and I love the guy, which doesn't mean that I agree
with everything he does or says.
And on this issue, and I'm normally a pretty calm
and measured guy, and when you're just out running
with your AirPods on and you start yelling into the wind
in Central Park, nobody else knows why you're yelling.
So you had such a moment?
I had a moment with Collins.
And again, Francis Collins is someone I respect enormously.
I mean, I live a big chunk of my life living in the world
of genetics and biotech and my book Hacking Darwin
is about the future of human engineering
and his work on the Human Genome Project
and so many other things have been fantastic.
And I'm a huge fan of the work of NIH
and he was right to say that the Chinese government
hasn't been forthcoming and we need to look into it.
But then you asked him, well, how will we know?
And then his answer was, we need to find the intermediate host.
Remember I said before, and so that made it clear
that he thought, well, we should have an investigation
but it comes from nature and we just need to find
that whatever it is, that intermediate animal host
in the wild and that'll tell us the story.
So he already had the conclusion in mind
and they're just waiting for the evidence
to support the conclusion.
That was my feeling.
I felt like he was open in general but he was tilting
and again, your first question was where do I fall?
He was like, I'm 85% or whatever it is, 80, 75, 90,
whatever it is in the direction of a lab incident.
It made it feel that he was 90, 10 in the other direction
which still means that he's open minded about the possibility
and that's why in my view, every single person
who talks about this issue, I think the right answer
in my view is we don't know conclusively.
In my, then this is my personal view,
the circumstantial evidence is strongly in favor
of a lab incident origin but that could immediately shift
with additional information.
We need transparency but we should come together
in absolutely condemning the outrageous coverup
carried out by the Chinese government
which to this day is preventing any meaningful investigation
into pandemic origins.
We have, if you use the economist numbers,
15 million people who are dead as a result of this pandemic
and I believe that the actions of the Chinese government
are disgracing the memory of these 15 million dead.
They're insulting the families and the billions of people
around the world who have suffered
from this totally avoidable pandemic
and whatever the origin, the fact the criminal coverup
carried out by the Chinese government
which continues to this day but most intensely
in the first months following the outbreak,
that's the reason why we have so many dead
and certainly as I was saying before,
I and a small number of others have been carrying this flame
since early last year but it's kind of crazy
that our governments haven't been demanding it
and we can talk about the World Health Organization process
which was deeply compromised in the beginning.
Now it's become much, much better
but again, it was the pressure of outsiders
that played such an important role
in shifting our national and international institutions
and while that's better than nothing,
it would have been far better
if our governments and international organizations
had done the right thing from this point.
If I could just make a couple of comments about Joe Rogan.
So there's a bunch of people in my life
who have inspired me, who have taught me a lot,
who I even look up to.
Many of them are alive, most of them are dead.
I want to say that Joe said a few critical words
about the conversation with Francis Collins.
Most of it offline with a lot of great conversations about it.
Some he said publicly.
And he was also critical to say that
me asking hard questions in an interview is not my strong suit.
And I really want to kind of respond to that
which I did privately as well publicly
to say that Joe is 100% right on that.
But that doesn't mean that always has to be the case.
And that is definitely something I want to work on
because most of the conversations I have,
I want to see the beautiful ideas in people's minds.
But there's some times where you have to ask the hard questions
to bring out the beautiful ideas.
And it's hard to do.
It's a skill.
And Joe is very good at this.
He says the way he put it in his criticisms
and he does this in his conversations,
which is, whoa, whoa, whoa, stop, stop, stop, stop, stop.
There's a kind of sense like, did you just say what you said?
Let's make sure we get to the bottom,
we clarify what you mean.
Because sometimes really big negative or difficult ideas
can be said as a quick aside in a sentence.
Like it's nothing.
But it could be everything.
And you want to make sure you catch that
and you talk about it.
And not as a gotcha,
not as a kind of way to destroy another human being
but to reveal something profound.
And that's definitely something I want to work on.
I also want to say that as you said,
you disagree with Joe on quite a lot of things.
So for a long time, Joe was somebody
that I was just a fan of and listened to.
He's now a good friend.
And I would say we disagree more than we agree.
And I love doing that.
But at the same time, I learned from that.
So it's like dual, like nobody in this world
can tell me what to think.
But I think everybody has a lesson to teach me.
I think that's a good way to approach it.
Whenever somebody has words of criticism,
I assume they're right and walk around with that idea.
To really sort of empathize with that idea
because there's a lesson there.
Sometimes my understanding of a topic
is altered completely or it becomes much more nuanced
and much richer for that kind of empathetic process.
But definitely, I do not allow anybody to tell me what to think,
whether it's Joe Rogan or Fyodor Dostoyevsky or Nietzsche
or my parents or the proverbial girlfriend
which I don't actually have.
But she's still busting my balls.
Exactly, in my imagination.
I have a girlfriend in Canada that I have to imagine.
Exactly, imagine conversations.
I don't want to mention that.
But also, I don't know if you've gotten a chance to see this.
I'd love to also mention this Twitter feud
between two other interesting people,
which is Brett Weinstein and Sam Harris
or Sam Harris and others in general.
It kind of breaks my heart that these two people I listen to
that are very thoughtful about a bunch of issues.
Let's put COVID aside
because people are very emotional about this topic.
I mean, I think they're deeply thoughtful and intelligent
whether you agree with them or not.
And I always learn something from their conversations.
And they are legitimately or have been for a long time friends.
And it's a little bit heartbreaking to me
to see that they basically don't talk in private anymore
and there's occasional jabs on Twitter.
And I hope that changes.
I hope that changes in general for COVID
that COVID brought out the, I would say,
the most emotional sides of people, the worst than people.
And I think there hasn't been enough love
and empathy and compassion.
And to see two people from whom I've learned a lot,
whether it's Eric Weinstein, Brett Weinstein, Sam Harris,
you can criticize them as much as you want,
their ideas as much as you want.
But if you're not sufficiently open minded
to admit that you have a lot to learn from their conversations,
I think you're not being honest.
And so I do hope they have those conversations.
And I hope we can kind of,
I think there's a lot of repairing to be done post COVID
of relationships, of conversations.
And I think empathy and love can help a lot there.
And this is also just a,
I talked to Sam privately,
but this is also a public call out
to put a little bit more love in the world.
And for these difficult conversations to happen.
Because Brett Weinstein could be very wrong
about a bunch of topics here around COVID.
But he could also be right.
And the only way to find out is to have those conversations.
Because there's a lot of people listening to both Sam Harris
and Brett Weinstein.
And if you go into these silos where you just keep telling
each other that you are the possessors of truth
and nobody else is the possessor of truth,
what starts happening is you both lose track
or the capability of arriving at the truth.
Because nobody's in the possession of the truth.
So anyway, there's just a call out that we should have
a little bit more conversation, a little bit more love.
I totally agree.
And both of those guys are guys who I respect.
And as you know, Brett and again, as I mentioned,
they're just a handful of us who were the early people
raising questions about the origins of this.
He was there also talking.
So people have heard him speak quite a bit about any viral drugs
and all that kind of stuff.
But he was also raising concerns about lab leak early on.
Yeah, exactly.
But I completely agree with you that we don't have to agree
with everybody, but it's great to have healthy conversations.
That's how we grow.
And absolutely, we live in a world where we're kind of,
if we're not careful, pushed into these little information
pockets.
And certainly on social media, I have different parts of my life.
One is focusing on issues of COVID origins.
And then I have genetics and biotechnology.
And then I have, which maybe we'll talk about later,
One Shared World, which is about how do we build a safer future.
And when I say critical things like the Chinese government,
we have to demand a full investigation into pandemic origins.
This is an outrage.
Then it's really popular.
When I say, let's build a better future for everyone in peace
and love, it's like, wow, three people liked it.
And one was my mother.
And so I just feel like we need to build.
We used to have that connectivity just built in because we had
these town squares and you couldn't get away from them.
Now we can get away from them.
So engaging with people who have a different background is really
essential.
I'm on Fox News sometimes three, four times a week.
And I wouldn't, in my normal life, I'm not watching that much of
Fox News or even television more generally.
But I just feel like if I just speak to people who are very similar
to me, it'll be comfortable.
But what have I contributed?
And so I think we really have to have those kinds of conversations
and recognize that at the end of the day, most people want to be
happy.
They want to live in a better world.
They maybe have different paths to get there.
But if we just break into camps that don't even connect with
each other, that's a much more dangerous world.
Let's dive back into the difficult pool.
Just like you said, in the English speaking world, it seems
popular, almost easy to demonize China, the Chinese government,
I should say.
But even China, like there's this kind of gray area that people
just fall into.
And I'm really uncomfortable with that.
Perhaps because in my mind, in my heart, in my blood, it echoes
of the Cold War and that kind of tension.
It feels like we almost desire conflict.
So we see demons when there is none.
So I'm a little cautious to demonize.
But at the same time, you have to be honest.
So it's like honest with the demons that are there and honest
when they're not.
This is kind of a geopolitical therapy session, the sorts.
So let's keep talking about China a little bit from different
angles.
So let's return to the director of the Center of Emerging
Infectious Disease at the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
Shijian Li, colloquially referred to as Batwoman.
So do you think she's lying?
Yes.
Do you think she's being forced to lie?
I've known a bunch of virologists in private and public
conversation that respect her as a human being, as a scientist.
I respect her as a human being.
Sorry, as a scientist, not a human being, because I think
they don't know the human.
They know the scientist and they respect her a lot as a
scientist.
Yeah, I respect her.
I've never met her.
We had one exchange, which I'll mention in a second in a
virtual forum, but I do respect her.
I actually think that she is somebody who has tried to do
the right thing.
She was one of the heroes of tracking down the origins of
SARS 1, and that was a major contribution.
But as we talked about earlier, it's a different thing,
living, being a scientist, or really kind of anything.
It's different being one of those people in an
authoritarian society than it is being in a different type
of society.
And so when Shijing Li said that the reason the WIV
database was taken offline in September 19 was because of
computer hacks, I don't think that's the story.
I don't think she thinks that's the story.
When I asked her in March of 2021, March of this year in a
Rutgers online forum, when I asked her whether the Chinese
military had any engagement with the Wuhan Institute of
Virology in any way, and she said absolutely not,
paraphrasing, I think she was lying.
Do I think that she had the ability to say, well, either
one, yes, but I can't talk about it, or I know there are a
lot of things that are happening at this institute that I
don't know about, and that could be one.
Could she have said that the personnel at the Wuhan
Institute of Virology have all had to go through
classification training so that they can know about what
can and can't be said?
Like she could have said all those things, but she
couldn't say all of those things.
And so, and I think that's why so many, at least in my
view, so many people in the, certainly in the Western
world got this story wrong from the beginning because if
your only prism was the science, and you just assumed
this is a science question to be left to the scientists,
Xu Jingli is just like any scientist working in
Switzerland or Norway, the Chinese government isn't
interfering in any way, and we can trust them.
That would lead you down one path.
In my view, the reason why I progressed as I did is I
felt like I had two keys, and I had one key as I live in
the science world through my work with WHO and my
books and things like that, but I also have another
part of my life in the world of geopolitics as an
Asia, quote unquote, expert and former National
Security Council official and other things, and I
felt, for me, I needed both keys to open that door.
But if I only had the science key, I wouldn't have
had the level of doubt and suspicion that I have.
But if my starting point was only doubt and suspicion,
well, it's coming from China, it must be that the
government is guilty, like that wouldn't help either.
I wonder what's in her mind, whether it's fear or
habit, because I think a lot of people in the former
Soviet Union, it's like Chernobyl, it's not really
fear, it's almost like a momentum, it's like the
reason I showed up to this interview weren't clothes
as opposed to being naked.
It's like, all right, it's like all of us are doing
the clothes thing.
Well, there was a startup years ago called Naked
News, did you ever hear about that?
They just would read the exact news.
With naked.
No, after each story, they'd take something off until
the end.
I don't think.
It's a good idea for podcasts.
They have an IPO.
Stay tuned.
Next time I'm with Michael Mells.
Yeah.
Okay.
So what do you think, I mean, because the reason I
asked that question is how do we kind of take
steps to improve without any kind of revolutionary
action?
You could say we need to inspire the Chinese people
to elect, to sort of revolutionize the system
from within, but like, who are we to suggest that
because we have our flaws too.
We should be working on our flaws as well.
But at the individual scientist level, what are
the small acts of rebellion that can be done?
How can we improve this?
Well, I don't know about small acts of rebellion,
but I'll try to answer your question from a few
different perspectives.
So right now, actually, as we speak, there is a
special session of the World Health Assembly going
on.
The World Health Assembly is the governing authority
over the World Health Organization where it's
represented by states and territories, 194 of them
tragically not including Taiwan because of the
Chinese government's assistance.
They're now beginning a process of trying to
negotiate a global pandemic treaty to try to have a
better process for responding to crises exactly
like we're in.
But unfortunately, for the exact same reasons that
we have failed, I mean, we had a similar process
after the first SARS.
We set up what we thought was the best available
system, and it has totally failed here.
And it's failed here because of the inherent
pathologies of the Chinese government system.
We are suffering from a pandemic that exists
because of the internal pathologies of the
Chinese state.
And that's why on one hand, I totally get this
impulse.
Well, we do it our way.
They do it their way.
Who's to say that one way is better?
And certainly right now in the United States,
we're at each other's throats.
We have a hard time getting anything meaningful
done.
And I'm sure there are people who are saying,
well, that model looks appealing.
But just as people could look to the United
States and say, well, because the United States
has such a massive reach, what we do domestically
has huge implications for the rest of the world,
they become stakeholders in our politics.
And that's why I think for a lot of years,
people have just been looking at U.S.
politics not because it's interesting, but because
the decisions that we make have big implications
for their lives.
The same is true for ours.
You could say that the lack of civil and political
rights in China is the...
It's up to the Chinese, not even people, because
they have no say, but to their government.
And they weren't democratically elected, that
they are recognized as the government.
But some significant percentage of the 15
million people now dead from COVID are dead
because in the earliest days following the outbreak,
whatever the origin, the voices of people
sounding the alarm were suppressed.
That the Chinese government had an...
Just like in Chernobyl, the Chinese government
had a greater incentive to lie to the
international community than to tell the truth.
And everybody was incentivized to pretty
much do the wrong thing.
And so that's why I think one of the big messages
of this pandemic is that all of our fates are
tied to everybody else's fates.
And so while we can say and should say,
well, let's focus on our own communities
and our countries, we're all stakeholders
in what happens elsewhere.
Gasko, a weird question.
So I'm going to do a few podcast interviews
with interesting people in Russia, in the
Russian language, because I could speak Russian.
And a lot of those people have, you know,
are not usually speaking in these kinds of formats.
Do you think it's possible to interview
Xi Jinping?
like her or anyone in the Chinese government?
I think not.
And I think the reason is because I think
they would, one, be uncomfortable being in any
environment where really unknown questions
will be asked.
And actually, so as you know, on this topic,
the Chinese, as I mentioned earlier,
the Chinese government has a gag order
on Chinese scientists.
And I think that's the reason why
I'm talking about prior government approval.
Xuejing Li has been able to speak.
And she's spoken at a number of forums.
I mentioned this Rutgers event.
What was the nature of that forum?
It was all of them were kind of science
conversations about the pandemic, including
the origins issue.
But I think that she, in her response to my question,
it was kind of this funny thing.
So they had this event for organized by Rutgers.
And I went on, it was an online event on Zoom.
But I got on there and I just realized
it was very poorly organized.
Like normally the controls that you would have
about who gets to chat to who, who gets to ask questions,
none of them were set.
And so I kind of couldn't believe it.
I was just sitting at home in my neon green fleece.
And I just started sending chat messages to Xuejing Li.
Anybody could.
It was insane.
And so I, but I thought, wow, this is incredible.
And so then it was unclear who got to ask questions.
And so I was like posting questions.
And then I was sending chats to the organizers of the event
saying, I really have a question.
And first they said, well, you can submit your questions
and we'll have submitted questions.
And then if we have time, we'll open up.
So I just, I mean, I just thought, well, what the hell?
I just sent messages to everybody.
And then the event was already done.
They were 15 minutes over time.
And then they said, all right, we have time just for one question.
And it's Jamie Metzel.
And like I said, I'm sitting there in my running clothes.
Like I wasn't, I was like multitasking and I heard my name.
And so I went diving back and I asked this question about,
did you know all of the work that was happening
at the Wuhan Institute of Virology,
not just your work?
And can you confirm that U.S. intelligence has said
that the military played a role.
It was engaged with the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
Do you deny that the Chinese military was involved in any way
with the Wuhan Institute of Virology?
And as I said before, she said, this is crazy.
Absolutely not.
It actually got, that one question got covered in the media
because it was like, I think an essential question.
But I just think that since then, to my knowledge,
she's not been in any public forums.
But that's why most people would be shocked that to date,
there has been no comprehensive international investigation
into pandemic origins.
There is no whistleblower provision.
So if you're, my guess is there are at least tens,
maybe hundreds of people in China who have relevant information
about the origins of the pandemic who are terrified
and don't dare share it.
And let's just say somebody wanted to get that information out,
to send it somewhere.
There's no official address.
The WHO doesn't have that.
Nobody has that.
And so I would love, you may as well ask.
I don't think it's likely that there'll be a yes.
But it could well be that there are defectors
who will want to speak.
So let me also push back on this idea.
So one, I want to ask if the language barrier is a thing.
Because I've talked to, so I understand Russian culture,
I think, or not understand, this is this.
I don't understand basically anything in this world.
But I mean, I hear the music that is Russian culture
and I enjoy it.
I don't hear that music for Chinese culture.
It's just not something I've experienced.
So it's a beautiful, rich, complex culture.
And from my sense, it seems distant to me.
Like whenever I look, even like we mentioned offline Japan
and so on, I probably don't even understand Japanese culture.
I believe I kind of do because I did martial arts my whole life.
But even that, it's just so distant.
If you've lived in Japan foreigners for like 20 years,
say the exact same thing.
It makes me sad.
It makes me sad because I will never be able to fully appreciate
the literature, the conversations, the people,
the little humor and the subtleties.
And those are all essential to understand
even this cold topics of science.
Because all of that is important to understand.
So that's a question for me if you think language barrier is a thing.
But the other thing I just want to kind of comment on is
the criticism of journalism that somebody like
Xi Jinping or even Xi Jinping, just anybody in China,
it's very skeptical to have really conversations
with anybody in the Western media.
Because it's like what are the odds that they will try
to bring out the beautiful ideas in the person.
And honestly, just this is a harsh criticism.
I apologize, but I kind of mean it.
Is the journalists that have some of these high profile conversations
often don't do the work.
They come off as not very intelligent.
And I know they're intelligent people.
They have not done the research.
They have not come up and read a bunch of books.
They have not even read the Wikipedia article.
Meaning put in the minimal effort to empathize,
to try to understand the culture of the people,
all the complexities, all the different ideas in the spaces.
Do all the incredible, not all,
but some of the incredible work that you've done initially.
Like that, you have to do that work to earn the right
to have a deep real conversation with some of these folks.
It's just disappointing to me that journalists often don't do that work.
So on that, just first, I completely agree with you.
I mean, there is just an incredible beauty in Chinese culture.
And I think all cultures, but certainly China has such a deep
and rich history, amazing literature and art,
and just human beings.
I mean, I'm a massive critic of the Chinese government.
I'm very vociferous about the really genocide in Xinjiang,
the absolute effort to destroy Tibetan culture,
the destruction of democracy in Hong Kong,
incredibly illegal efforts to seize basically
the entire South China Sea.
And I could go on and on and on.
But Chinese culture is fantastic.
And I can't speak to every technical field,
but just in terms of having journalists,
and I'll speak to American journalists,
people like Peter Hessler, who have really invested the time
to live in China, to learn the language, learn the culture.
Peter himself, who is maybe one of our best journalists
covering China from a soul level,
he was kicked out of China.
So it's very, very difficult.
Yeah, it's really...
I mean, you talked about my website on Pandemic Origins.
So when I launched it, I had it...
I'm not a Chinese speaker,
but I had the entire site translated into Chinese,
and I have it up on my website just because I felt like,
well, if somebody, I mean, the Great Firewall
makes it very, very difficult for people in China
to access that kind of information.
But I figured if somebody gets there
and they want to have it in their own language,
but it's hard because the Chinese government is represented
by these, quote, unquote, wolf warriors,
which is like these basic ruffians,
and I personally was condemned by name
by the spokesman of the Chinese Foreign Ministry
from the podium in Beijing.
And so it's really hard because I absolutely think
the American people and the Chinese people,
I mean, maybe all people, but we have so much in common.
I mean, yes, China is an ancient civilization,
but they kind of wiped out their own civilization
in the Great Leap Forward and Cultural Revolution.
They burned their scrolls.
They smashed their artworks.
And so it's a very young society, kind of like America
is a young society.
So we have a lot in common.
And if we just kind of got out of our own ways,
we could have a beautiful relationship.
But there's a lot of things that are happening.
Certainly the United States feels responsible
to defend the postwar international order
that past generations helped build,
and I'm a certain believer in that,
and China is challenging that.
And the Chinese government,
and they've shared that view with the Chinese people,
feel that they haven't been adequately respected,
and now they're building a massive nuclear arsenal
and all these other things to try to position themselves
in the world with an articulated goal
of being the lead country in the world.
And that puts them at odds with the United States.
So there are a lot of real reasons
that we need to be honest about for division.
But if that's all we focus on,
if we don't say that there's another side of the story
that brings us together,
we'll put ourselves on an inevitable glide path
to a terrible outcome.
What do you make of Xi Jinping?
So two questions.
So one in general, and two more on Lableak
and his meeting with our President Biden
in discussion of Lableak.
So I feel that Xi Jinping has a very narrow goal
of articulated, of establishing China
as the lead country in the world
by the 100th anniversary of the founding
of the modern Chinese state.
And it's ruthless and it's strategic.
There's a great book called The Long Game
by Rush Doshi, who's actually now working in the White House
about this goal and a pretty clearly articulated goal
to subvert the postwar international order
and in China's interest.
And maybe every leader wants to organize the world
around their interests, but I feel that his vision
of what that entails is not one that I think
is shareable for the rest of the world.
I mean, the strength of the United States
with all of our flaws is particularly in that postwar period.
We put forward a model that was desirable to a lot of people.
Certainly it was desirable to people in Western Europe
and then Eastern Europe and Japan and Korea.
It doesn't mean it's perfect.
The United States is deeply flawed.
As articulated to date, I don't think most people
and countries would like to live in a sinocentric world.
And so I certainly, as I mentioned before,
I'm a huge critic of what Xi Jinping is doing,
the incredible brutality in Xinjiang, in Tibet,
and elsewhere.
Yeah, the censorship one, it gives me a lot of trouble.
On the science realm and just in journalism and just the world,
it prevents us from having conversations with each other.
Do you know about the Winnie the Pooh thing?
Yes. I mean, it's ridiculous.
So to me, that's such a good illustration of censorship being petty.
Well, censorship has to be petty
because the goal of censorship,
maybe you experienced in the Soviet Union,
is to get into your head.
Like if it's just censorship, like you say down with the state
and you can't say that.
But you can say all the other things up to that point.
Eventually, people will feel empowered to say down with the state.
And so I think the goal of this kind of authoritarian censorship
is to turn you into the censor.
And so the...
Like self censorship.
Because they almost have to have you think,
well, if I'm going to make any criticism,
maybe they're going to come and get me.
So it's safer to not do.
I mean, I've traveled through North Korea pretty extensively
and I've seen that in its ultimate form.
But that's what they're trying to do in China too.
Yeah.
So for people who are not familiar,
it's such a clear illustration of just the pettiness of censorship
and leaders, the corrupting nature of power.
But there's a meme of Xi Jinping with, I guess, Barack Obama
and the meme is that he looks like Winnie the Pooh in that picture.
And that was...
The presidential Xi Jinping looks like Winnie the Pooh.
And I guess that became...
Because that got censored.
Like, mentions of Winnie the Pooh got censored all across China.
Winnie the Pooh became the unknowing revolutionary hero
that represents freedom of speech and so on.
But it's just such an absurd thing.
Because we spend all so much time in this conversation
to talk about the censorship
that's a little bit more understandable to me.
Which is like, we messed up.
And it wasn't...
Maybe it's almost understandable errors that happen in the progress of science.
I mean, you can always argue that there's a lot of mistakes along the way
and censorship along the way caused the big mistake.
You can argue that same way for the Chernobyl.
But those are sort of understandable and difficult topics.
Like, Winnie the Pooh.
But in your message, it shows both sides of the story.
I mean, one, how petty authoritarian censors have to be.
And that's why the messaging from the Chinese government is so consistent.
No matter who you are, you have to be careful what you say.
It's the story of Peng Shui, the tennis player.
She dared raise her voice in an individual way.
Jack Ma, the richest man in China, had a minor criticism of the Chinese government.
He had basically disappeared from the public eye.
Fan Bingbing, who's like one of the leading Chinese movie stars,
she was seen as not loyal enough and she just vanished.
So the message is, no matter who you are, no matter what level,
if you don't mind everything you say, you could lose everything.
I'm pretty hopeful, optimistic about a lot of things.
And so for me, if the Chinese government stays with its current structure,
I think what I hope they start fixing is the freedom of speech.
But they can't.
I mean, the thing is, if they open up freedom of speech,
really in a meaningful way, they can't maintain their current form of government.
And it's connected, as I was saying before, to the origins of the pandemic.
I mean, if my hypothesis was right, that was the big choice that the national government had.
Do we really investigate the origins of the pandemic?
Do we deliver a message that transparency is required,
public transparency is required from local officials?
If they do that, the entire system collapse, pretty much everybody in China has a relative
who has died as a result of the actions of the Communist Party,
particularly in the Great Leap Forward.
It's nearly 50 million people died as a result of Mao's disastrous policies.
And yet, why is Mao's picture still on Tiananmen Square and it's on the money?
Because maintaining that fiction is the foundation of the legitimacy of the Chinese state.
If people were allowed, just say what you want.
Do you really think Mao was such a great guy, even though your own relatives are dead as a result?
Do you really buy, even on this story that China did nothing wrong,
even though in the earliest days of the pandemic,
at least two, at least Chinese scientists themselves courageously issued a preprint paper
that was later almost certainly forcibly retracted,
saying, well, this looks like this comes from one of the Wuhan labs that we're studying.
If you opened up that window, I think that the Chinese government would not be able to continue
in its current form, then that's why they cracked down at Tiananmen Square.
That's why with Feng Shui, the tennis player,
if they had let her accuse somebody from the Communist Party of sexual assault,
and they said, okay, now people, you can use social media and you can have your Me Too moment
and let us know who in the Chinese Communist Party or your boss in a business has assaulted you.
Just like in every society, I'm sure there's tons of women who've been sexually assaulted, manipulated, abused by men.
I certainly hope that there can be that kind of opening,
but if I were an authoritarian dictator, that's the thing I would be most afraid of.
Yeah, a dictator perhaps, but I think you can gradually increase the freedom of speech.
I think you can maintain control over the freedom of press first.
Control the press more, but let the lower levels open up YouTube.
Open up where individual citizens can make content.
There's a lot of benefits to that.
From an authoritarian perspective, you can just say that's misinformation,
that's conspiracy theories, all those kinds of things,
but at least I think if you open up that freedom of speech at the level of the individual citizen,
that's good for entrepreneurship, for the development of ideas, of exchange of ideas, all that kind of stuff.
I just think that increased the GDP of the country.
There's a lot of benefits.
I feel like you can still play some dark thoughts here,
but I feel like you can still play the game of thrones, still maintain power while giving freedom to the citizenry.
I think just like with North Korea is a good example of where cracking down too much can completely destroy your country.
There's some balance you can strike in your evil mind and still maintain authoritarian control over the country.
Obviously, it's not obvious, but I'm a big supporter of freedom of speech.
It seems to work really well.
I don't know what the failure cases for freedom of speech are.
Probably we're experiencing them with Twitter and where the nature of truth is being completely flipped upside down,
but it seems like on the whole, the ability to defeat lies with more, not through censorship,
but through more conversations, more information is the right way to go.
Can I tell you a little story?
Two stories about North Korea.
A number of years ago, I was invited to be part of a small six person delegation advising the government of North Korea
on how to establish special economic zones, because other countries have used these SEZs as a way of building their economies.
When I was invited, I thought, well, maybe there's an opening, and I certainly believe in that.
We flew to China, crossed the border into North Korea, and then we were met by our partners from the North Korean Development Organization.
We zigzagged the country for almost two weeks visiting all these sites where they were intended to create these special economic zones.
And in each site, they had their local officials, and they had a map, and they showed us where everything that was going to be built.
And the other people who were really technical experts on how to set up a special economic zone,
they were asking questions, well, should you put the entrance over here, or shouldn't you put it over there, and what if there's flooding?
And I kept asking just these basic questions, like, what do you think you're going to do here?
Why do you think you can be competitive? Do you know anything about who you're competing against?
Are you empowering your workers to innovate because everybody else is innovating?
So at the end of the trip, they flew us to Pyongyang, and they put us in this...
It looked kind of like the United Nations. They probably had 500 people there, and I gave a speech to them.
I obviously was in English, and it was translated. And I figured, you know, I've come all this way.
I'm just going to be honest. If they arrest me for being honest, that's on them.
And I said, I'm here because I believe we can never give up hope that we always have to try to connect.
I'm also here because I think that North Korea connecting to the world economy is an important first step.
But having visited all of your special economic zone sites and having met with all of your or many of your officials,
I don't think your plan has any chance of succeeding because you're trying to sell into a global market.
But you need to have market information. And I gave examples of GE and others that the innovation can't only happen at one place.
And if you want innovation to happen from the people who are doing this, you have to empower them.
They have to have access. They have to have voice.
I mean, nobody... I mean, people after they kind of had to condemn me because what I was saying was challenging.
So I certainly agree with you. And then just one side story of them that night.
And it was just kind of bizarre because North Korea is so desperately poor, but they were trying to impress us.
And so we had these embarrassingly sumptuous banquets.
And so for our final dinner that night, it really looked like something from Beauty and the Beast.
I mean, it was like China and waiters and tuxedos, and they had this beautiful dinner.
And then afterwards, because we'd now spent two weeks with our North Korean partners,
they brought out this karaoke machine and our North Korean counterparts, they sang songs to us in Korean.
And so I said, well, we want to reciprocate. Do you have any English songs on your karaoke machine?
It's North Korea, obviously they didn't.
But there was... And I said, well, I have an idea.
And so there was one of the women who'd been part of the North Korean delegation.
She was able just to play the piano, just like you could hum a tune and she could play it on the piano.
And so I said, all right, here's this tune, which I whispered in her ear.
When I give you the signal, just play this tune over and over.
And so I got these... I mean, there were the six of us and maybe 20 North Koreans.
And we are all in this circle, Sarah. Everybody hold hands.
And then put your right... Just try to put your right foot in front of your left,
and then left foot in front of the right, going sideways.
And I said, all right, hit it. And she played a North Korean version of Havana Gila.
And I think it was the first and only horror that they've ever done in North Korea.
That's hilarious.
I survived.
Was this recorded or not?
It was not.
Oh, no.
Yeah. If they had free YouTube, this would have been a big one.
Let's return to the beginning and just...
Patient zero. It's kind of always incredible to think that there's one human at which it all started.
Who do you think was patient zero?
Do you think it was somebody that worked at Wuhan Institute of Virology?
Do you think it was... There was a leak of some other kind that led to the infection?
Like, what do we know? Because there's this December 8th slash December 16th case of...
Maybe you can describe what that is.
And then there's like... What's his name?
Michael Warabi has a nice timeline.
I'm sure you have a timeline.
But he has a nice timeline that puts the average at like November or something, like 18th and November 16th.
That's the average estimate for when the patient zero got infected, when the first human infection happened.
Yeah. So just two points.
One is it may be that there's infectee zero and patient zero.
It could be that the first person infected was asymptomatic because we know there's a lot of people who are asymptomatic.
And then there's the question of, well, who is patient zero?
Meaning the first person to present themselves in some kind of health facility where that diagnosis could be made.
So can we actually link on that definition?
Yeah.
So is that to you a good definition of patient zero?
Okay, there's a bunch of stuff here because this virus is weird.
Yeah.
So one is who gets infected, one who is infectious or the first person to infect others.
And who shows up to hospital?
Yeah.
So I think that's why I'm calling the first person to show up to a hospital who's diagnosed with COVID 19.
I'm calling that person patient zero.
There's also, there is somewhere, the first person to be infected.
And that person maybe never showed up in a hospital because maybe they were asymptomatic and never got sick.
So let me start with what I'm calling infectee zero.
Here are some options.
I talked before about some person who was a villager in some remote village.
It's almost impossible to imagine, but possible to imagine because strange things happen.
And that person somehow gets to Wuhan.
Yeah, just to still man that argument.
There's not an argument, it's a statement, but strange things happen all the time.
No, I agree.
It doesn't mean that logic doesn't apply and probabilities don't apply.
But we all, I mean, in general principle, everyone, if we were honest, should be agnostic about everything.
I think I'm Jamie, but is there a 0.01% chance or 001% chance that I'm not?
It could be.
There's a large number of people arguing about the meaning of the word I in that I'm Jamie.
Exactly.
What is consciousness?
So we could spend another three hours going into that one.
So one possibility is there's some remote villager.
Another possibility is there's some somehow bizarrely there are these infected animals that come from Southern China, most likely.
Maybe there's only one of them that's infected, which how could that possibly be?
And it's only sent to Wuhan.
It's not sent anywhere else to any of the markets there or whatever.
And then maybe somebody in a market is infected.
That's one remote possibility, but a possibility.
Another is that researchers from the Wuhan Institute of Virology go down to Southern China.
We haven't talked about it yet, but in 2012, there were six minors.
There were six minors were sent into a copper mine in Southern China and Yunnan province.
All of them got very sick with what now appear like COVID 19 like symptoms.
Half of them died.
Blood samples from them were taken to the Wuhan Institute of Virology and elsewhere.
And then after that, there were multiple site visits to that mine collecting viral samples that were brought to the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
Included among those samples was this now infamous RETG 13 virus, which is among the genetically closest viruses to SARS CoV2.
There were eight other viruses that were collected from that mine that were presumably very similar to that.
And again, we have no access to the information about those and many of the other, most, almost all of the other viruses.
So could it be that one of the people who was sent from the Wuhan Institute of Virology or the Wuhan Centers for Disease Control,
they went down there to collect and they got infected asymptomatically and brought it back?
Could it be that they were working on these viruses in the laboratory?
And there was an issue with waste disposal.
We know that the Wuhan CDC had a major problem with waste disposal.
And just before the pandemic, one, they put out an RFP to fix their waste disposal.
And in early 2019, they moved to their new site, which was basically across the street from the Huanan seafood market.
So could there have been an issue of somebody infected in the lab of waste disposal?
Could a laboratory animal, their experiences in China, actually China just recently passed a law saying it's illegal to sell laboratory animals in the market
because there were scientists or one scientist who was selling laboratory animals in the market and people would just come and buy it.
So there are so many scenarios.
But if I, again, connect it to my 85% number, I think in the whole category of laboratory related incidents,
whether it's collection, waste, something connected to the lab, I think that's the most likely.
But there are other credible people who would say they think it's not the most likely.
And I welcome their views and we need to have this conversation.
So in your write up, what's the URL?
Because I always find it by doing Jamie Marshall lab leak.
That's probably the easiest.
No, but if you just go to jamymetzle.com, then there's just a thing, it's COVID origins.
Or you could just Google jamymetzle lab leak.
Google search engine is such a powerful thing.
You mentioned in that write up that you don't think, this could be just me misreading it or it's just slightly miswritten,
but you don't think that the viruses from that 2012 mind, which is fascinating, could be the backbone for SARS CoV2.
So what I mean, just the specific virus, which I mentioned RATG13, and there's a whole history of that,
because it had a different name and it looked and should Zheng Li provided wrong information about when it had been sequenced.
I mean, there was a whole issue connected to that.
But the genetic difference, even though it's 96.2% similar to the SARS CoV2 virus,
that's actually a significant difference, even though that and a virus called banal 52 that was collected in Laos are the two most similar.
There still are differences.
So I'm not saying RATG13 is the backbone, but is there, I believe there is a possibility that other viruses that were collected,
either in that mine in Yunnan in Southern China or in Laos or Cambodia, because that was with the EcoHealth Alliance proposals and documents.
Their plan was to collect viruses in Laos and Cambodia and elsewhere and bring them to the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
So that there are people, as a matter of fact, just when I was sitting here before this message,
I got, before this interview, I got a message from somebody who was saying,
well, Peter Dezak is telling everybody that the viral sample, the banal 52 from Laos,
proves that there's not a lab incident origin of the pandemic and it actually doesn't prove that at all,
because these viruses were being collected in places like Laos and Cambodia and being brought to the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
So those are like early, early, like the prequel.
So these are, they're not sufficiently similar to be, to serve as a backbone,
but they kind of tell a story that they could have been brought to the lab through several processes including genetic modification
or through the natural evolution processes, accelerated evolution.
They could have arrived at something that has the spike protein and the cleavage, the foreign cleavage site and all that kind of stuff.
So what I'm saying is the essential point is if we had access,
if we knew everything that was being, every virus that was being held at the Wuhan Institute of Virology and the Wuhan CDC,
we had full access, we had full access to everybody's lab notes,
and we did just the kind of forensic investigation that has been so desperately required since day one,
we'd be able to say, well, what did you have? Because if we knew, if it should come out,
that the Wuhan Institute of Virology had in its repository prior to the outbreak,
either SARS CoV2 or a reasonable precursor to it, that would prove the lab incident hypothesis.
In my mind, that's almost certainly why they are preventing any kind of meaningful investigation.
So my hypothesis is not that what RITG13 says is because, as I mentioned earlier,
the genetics of virus are constantly recombinating.
So what that means is if you don't have very many total outlier viruses in a BAT community,
because these viruses are always mixing and matching with each other,
and so if you have RITG13, which is relatively similar to SARS CoV2, there's a pretty decent likelihood
there was other stuff that was collected at this mine called Mojang Mine in Yunnan province,
maybe in Laos and Cambodia, and that's why we need to have that information.
Do you think somebody knows who patient zero is within China?
Well, there's two things. One is, I think, somebody and people probably know.
And then two, it's been incredibly curious that the best virus chasers in the world are in China,
and they are in Wuhan. And we can talk about this deeply compromised, now vastly improved,
world health organization process. But when they went there, the local and national Chinese authorities
said, oh, we haven't tested the samples in our blood center. We haven't done any of this tracing.
And these deeply compromised people who were part of the international part of the joint study tour,
when they came out with their visit early this year and came out with their report,
they had, in my mind, just an absurd letter to the editor in nature saying,
well, if we don't hurry back, we're not going to know what happened,
assuming that the people in China are like bumpkins who on their own don't know how to trace the origin of a virus.
And the opposite is the case. So I think there are people in China who at least know a lot.
They know a lot more than they're saying. And the best case scenario is the Chinese government wants to prevent
any investigation, including by them. The worst case scenario is that there are people who already know.
And that's why, again, my point from day one has been we need a comprehensive international investigation in Wuhan
with full access to all relevant records, samples and personnel. When this, again, deeply flooded,
can I give you a little history of this WHO process?
Okay. Who are the... That's funny. I'm so...
Who's on first?
Who's on first. I'm so funny with the jokes. Look at me go.
Who are the WHO? So what is this organization? What is its purpose?
What role did it play in the pandemic? It certainly was demonized in the realm of politics.
This is an institution that was supposed to save us from this pandemic.
A lot of people believe it failed. Has it failed? Why did it fail?
And you said it's improving. How's it improving?
Great. All right. I hope you don't mind. I'm going to have to talk for a little bit of extra...
I love this.
Okay. Good. Good. Good. Good.
So the WHO is an absolutely essential organization created in 1948 in that wonderful period after
the Second World War when the United States and allied countries asked the big, bold questions,
how do we build a safer world for everyone? And so that's the WHO.
Although there are many critics of the WHO, if we didn't have it, we would need to invent it
because the whole nature of these big public health issues, and certainly for pandemics,
but all sorts of things, is that they are transnational in nature.
And so we cannot just build moats. We cannot build walls. We are all connected to it.
So that's the idea.
There's a political process because the United Nations and the WHO is part of it.
It exists within a political context. And so the current Director General of the World Health Organization,
who was just reelected for his second five year term, is Dr. Tedros Adanom Gabrielsus,
who is from Ethiopia, Tigrayan from Ethiopia.
And in full disclosure, I have a lot of respect for Tedros.
Tedros got his job. He was not America's candidate. He was not Britain's candidate.
Our candidate was a guy named David Nabarro, who I also know and have tremendous respect for.
China led the process of putting Tedros in this position.
And in the earliest days of the pandemic, Tedros, in my view, even though I have tremendous respect for him,
I think he made a mistake. The WHO doesn't have its own independent surveillance network.
It's not organized to have it, and the states have not allowed it.
So it's dependent on member states for providing it information.
And because it's a poorly funded organization dependent on its bosses who are these governments,
its natural instinct isn't to condemn its bosses. It's to say, well, let's quietly work with everybody.
Having said that, the Chinese government knowingly lied to Tedros.
And Tedros, in repeating the position of the Chinese government, which incidentally, I would say,
Donald Trump also did the exact same thing.
Donald Trump had a private conversation with Xi Jinping and then repeated what she had told him.
Both of them were wrong.
Dr. Tedros, I think when Chinese government was lying, knowingly lying, saying there's no human to human transmission,
Dr. Tedros said that. And even though within the World Health Organization,
there were private critiques saying China is now doing exactly what it did in SARS 1.
It's not providing access. It's not providing information.
Tedros's instinct, because of his background, because of his role and wrongly,
was to have a more collaborative relationship with China,
particularly by making assertions based on the information that was wrong.
Don't call people liars. They're not going to be happy with you.
They're not going to be happy. And the job of the WHO isn't to condemn states.
It's to do the best possible job of addressing problems.
And I think that the culture was, well, let's do the most that we can if we totally alienate China on day one.
We're in even worse shape than if we call them out for...
I'm not exactly sure, by the way, that maybe you can also steal man that argument.
It's not completely obvious that that's a terrible decision.
If you and I were in that role, we would make that decision.
It's complicated because you want China on your side to help solve this.
So I would have made a different decision, which is why I never would have been selected as the director general.
There's a selection criteria that everybody kind of needs to support you.
This is just the beginning.
Can you also just elaborate or kind of restate what were the inaccuracies that you quickly mentioned?
So human to human transmission, what were the...
So the most important, there were a few things.
One, China didn't report the outbreak.
Two, they had the sequenced genome of the SARS CoV2 virus and they didn't share it for two critical weeks.
And when they did share it, it was inadvertent.
I mean, there was a very, very courageous scientist who essentially leaked it and was later punished for leaking it,
even though the Chinese government is now saying we were so great by releasing...
Wait, I was really confused. Really?
So I'm so clueless about this as most things.
Because I thought, because there's a celebration of, isn't this amazing that we got the sequence,
like this amazing and then the scientific community across the world stepped up
and were able to do a lot of stuff really quickly with that sharing?
Because I thought the Chinese government shared it.
No, no, they sat on it for two weeks.
Oh, no.
When they shared it against their will, it was incredible.
Moderna, 48 hours later, after getting the information, getting the sequence genome,
they had the formulation for what's now the Moderna COVID 19 vaccine.
But that's two critical weeks.
In those early days, they blocked the World Health Organization from sending its experts to Wuhan for more than three weeks.
I said they lied about human to human transmission.
During that time, they were aggressively enacting their cover up, destroying records,
hiding samples, imprisoning people who were asking tough questions.
They soon after established their gag order.
They fought internally in the World Health Organization to prevent the declaration of a global emergency.
So China definitely, I mean, I couldn't be stronger in my critique of China,
particularly what it did in those early days.
But it really, what it's doing even to today is outrageous.
So then there was the question of, well, how do we examine what actually happened?
And the Prime Minister of Australia then and now, Scott Morrison, was incredibly courageous.
And he said, we need a full investigation.
And because of that, the Chinese government attacked him personally and imposed trade sanctions on Australia
to try not just to punish Australia, but to deliver a message to every other country.
So if you ask questions, we're going to punish you ruthlessly.
And that certainly was the message that was delivered.
The Australians brought that idea of a full investigation to the World Health Assembly in May of 2020.
As I mentioned before, the WHA is the governing authority of states above the World Health Organization.
And so, but instead of passing a resolution calling for a full investigation,
what ended up ironically and tragically passing with Chinese support was a mandate to have essentially a Chinese controlled joint study
where half of the team, a little more than half of the team was Chinese experts,
government affiliated Chinese experts,
and half were independent international experts but organized by the WHO.
And then it took six months to negotiate the terms of reference.
And again, while China was doing all this cover up, they delayed and delayed and delayed.
And by the terms of reference that were negotiated, China had veto power over who got to be a member of the international group.
And that group was not entitled to access to raw data.
The Chinese side would give them conclusions based on their own analysis of the raw data, which was totally outrageous.
So then, and I was a big eye and others, now friend of mine, although we've never met in person,
Gilles de Manouf in New Zealand, he did a great job of chronicling just the letter by letter of the terms of reference.
So then it took, now it's January of this year, January 2021,
this deeply flawed, deeply compromised international group is sent to Wuhan.
What's the connection between this group and the joint study?
So the joint study had had the Chinese side and the international side.
So these international experts, then part of their examination was going for one month to Wuhan.
And the nature of the flaws of this international group?
It's okay, really important point.
And I'm sorry, I wasn't clear on that.
Rather, the mandate of what they were doing was not to investigate the origins of the pandemic.
It was to have a joint study into the zoonotic origins of the virus,
which was interpreted to mean the natural origins hypothesis.
They weren't empowered for a single hypothesis, so that they weren't empowered to examine the lab incident origin.
They were there to look at the natural origin hypothesis.
To shop for some meat at the markets?
How do you do this investigation?
So then they were there for a month.
Of the makeup of the team, guess who was?
So the United States government proposed three experts for this team.
People who had a lot of background.
This was the Trump administration, people who had a lot of background, including in investigating lab incidents.
None of those people were accepted.
The one American who was accepted.
Don't tell me it's Peter Desick.
Peter Desick, who had this funding relationship for many years with the Wuhan Institute of Virology,
whose entire basically professional reputation was based on his collaboration with Xu Zhengli,
who had written the February 2020 Lancet letter saying it comes from natural origin
and anybody who's suggesting otherwise is a conspiracy theorist,
and who, at least according to me, had been at very, very least the opposite of transparent
and at most engaged in a massive disinformation campaign.
He is the one American who's on this.
So they go there, they have one month in Wuhan.
Two weeks of it are spent in quarantine, just in their hotel rooms.
So then they have two weeks, but really it's just 10 working days.
One of the earliest, and so then they're kind of, we've all seen the pictures,
they're traveling around Wuhan in little buses.
One of the first visits they have is to this museum exhibition on the,
it's basically a propaganda exhibition on the success,
Xi Jinping and the success in fighting COVID.
And they said, well, we had to show respect to our Chinese hosts.
I think what the Chinese hosts were saying is let's just, we're just going to rub your noses in this.
You're going to go where we tell you, you're going to hear what we want you to hear.
So they have that little short time.
They spend a few hours.
So they weren't in control of where the bus goes.
No, I mean, they made recommendations.
Many of their recommendations were accepted.
But they, like when they went to the Wuhan Institute of Virology and some of them did,
they had a, they weren't able to do any kind of audit when they had asked for access to raw data.
They weren't provided, they weren't provided that.
They were, it was, as I said in my 60 minutes interview,
it was a chaperoned study tour.
It was not even remotely close to an investigation.
And the thing they were looking at wasn't the origins of the pandemic.
It was the single hypothesis of a quote unquote natural, natural origins.
Then, I mean, it was really so shocking for me on February 9 of this year in Wuhan,
the Chinese government sets up a joint press event where it's the Chinese side and the international side.
And during that press event, a guy named Peter Ben Embarak, and it's a little confusing.
He was basically the head of this delegation and he works for the WHO even though this was an independent committee.
It was organized by the WHO.
So Peter Ben Embarak gets up there and says, we think it's most likely it comes from nature.
Then he says, we think it's possible it comes through frozen food, which is absolutely outrageous.
I mean, it's basically preposterous.
Alina Chan calls this popsicle origins, but it's really, really unlikely.
But then most significantly, he says that we've all agreed that a lab incident origin is quote unquote extremely unlikely and shouldn't be investigated.
We later learned that the way they came up with that determination was by a show of hands vote of the international experts and the Chinese experts.
And the Chinese experts had to do their vote in front of the Chinese government officials who were constantly there.
So even if whatever they thought there was no possibility that someone raises their hand is, oh yeah, I think it's a lab origin.
So that was outrageous thing number one.
Outrageous thing number two, which I mean, I'll come back to my response in February.
Outrageous thing number two is months later, Peter Ben Embarak does an interview on Danish television.
And he says, actually, I was lying about extremely unlikely because the Chinese side, they didn't want any mention of a lab incident origin anywhere, including in the report that later came out.
And so the deal we made, even though he himself thought that at least some manifestation of a lab incident origin was likely and that there should be an investigation particularly.
He said, well, that's kind of weird that the Wuhan CDC moved just across from the Huanan seafood market just before the beginning of the pandemic.
But he said, as a horse trading deal with the Chinese authorities, it shouldn't be that he agreed to say it was extremely unlikely and shouldn't be investigated.
So I was in actually in Colorado staying with my parents and I stayed up late watching this press event.
And I was appalled because I knew after two weeks there was no way they could possibly come to that conclusion.
So I immediately sent a private message to Tedros, the WHO Director General, essentially saying there's no way they had enough access to come to this conclusion.
If the WHO doesn't distance itself from this, the WHO itself is going to be in danger because it's going to be basically institutional capture by the Chinese.
This was repeating the Chinese government's propaganda points and Tedros sent me a really, again, why I have so much respect for Tedros, sent me a private note saying, don't worry, we are determined to do the right thing.
And so I got that private message and again, I really like Tedros.
But I thought, well, what are you going to do?
Three days later, Tedros makes a public statement and he says, I've heard this thing.
I don't think that this is a final answer.
We need to have a full investigation into this process.
He then released two more statements saying we need to have a full investigation with access to raw data and we need a full audit of the Wuhan labs.
And that part was really, really great. But then this saga continues because so I was part of a group, as I mentioned before, this Paris group.
It was about two dozen or so experts and we'd been meeting since 2020 and having regular meetings and we just present papers, present data, debate to try to really get to the bottom of things.
And it was all private.
So I went to this group and I said, look, this playing field is now skewed.
These guys, they've put out this thing.
LabN is in origin extremely unlikely.
It's in every newspaper in the world.
We can't just be our own little private group talking to each other.
So I led the political process of drafting what became four open letters that many of us signed, most of us signed.
That saying, all right, here's why this investigation, not in this study group and the report are not credible.
Here's what's wrong.
Here's what a full investigation would look like.
Here's a treasure map of all the resources where people can look and we demand a comprehensive investigation.
So those four open letters were in pretty much every newspaper in the world and it played a really significant role along with some other things.
There was later, there was a letter, a short letter in science making basically similar points in a much more condensed way.
There were some higher profile articles by Nicholas Wade and Nick Baker and others.
And those collectively shifted the conversation.
And then really impressively, the WHO and with Tedros's leadership did something that was really incredible.
And that is earlier this year, they, meaning the leadership of the WHO, not the World Health Assembly, but the leadership of the WHO announced the establishment of what's called SAGO,
the Scientific Advisory Group on the Origins of Novel Pathogens.
And basically what they did was overrule their own governing board and say, we're going to create our own entity.
And so it basically dissolved that deeply flawed international joint study group.
And a lot of those people, they have become very critical, like the Chinese of Tedros.
And they had an open call for nominations to be part of SAGO.
And so a lot of people put in their nominations, they selected 26 people.
But our group, we had a meeting and we were unhappy with that list of 26.
It still felt skewed toward the natural origin hypothesis.
So again, I drafted and we worked on together an open letter which we submitted to the WHO saying, we think this list, it's a step in the right direction, but it's not good enough.
And we call on these three people to be removed and we have these three people who we think should be added.
Incredibly, and I was in private touch with the WHO, after announcing the 26 people, the WHO said, we're reopening the process.
So send in more and then they added two more people, one of whom is an expert in the audit, auditing of lab incidents.
And then one of the, so they added those two.
And then when they just released the list of people who are part of SAGO, this one woman, a highly respected Dutch virologist named Marion Koepmans, who had been part of that deeply flawed and compromised international study group
who had called, who has consistently called a lab incident origin, quote unquote, a debunked conspiracy theory.
As of now, her name is not on the list.
We haven't seen any announcements.
So I summary, and I'm sorry to go on for so long and to be so animated about this.
I genuinely feel that the WHO is trying to do the right thing, but they exist within a political context.
And they're kind of, it's like, they're pushing at the edges, but there's only so far that they can go.
And that's why we definitely need to have full accountability for the WHO.
We need to expand the mandate to WHO, but we need to recognize that states have a big role.
And China is an incredibly influential state that's doing everything possible to prevent the kind of full investigation into pandemic origins that's so desperately required.
Well, it sounds like the leadership made all the difference in the WHO.
So like the way to change the momentum of large institutions is through the leadership.
Leadership and empowerment, as I mentioned, the World Health Assembly is meeting now.
And I think that it shouldn't be that we require superhumans.
And there are some people who are big critics of WHO, the leader of the WHO in SARS 1 was definitely more aggressive.
She had a different set of powers at that time.
But it can't be entirely, I mean, we definitely need strong willed, aggressive, independent people in these kinds of roles.
We also need a more empowered WHO, like when the Chinese government in the earliest days of the pandemic said, we're just not going to allow you to send a team to collect your own information.
And we're not going to allow you to have any kind of independent surveillance.
There's very little that the WHO could do because of the limitations of its mandate. And we can't just say we're going to have a WHO that only compromises Chinese sovereignty.
If we want to have a powerful WHO, we should say you have emergency teams when the director general says an emergency team needs to go somewhere.
If they aren't allowed to go there that day, you could say there's an immediate referral to the Security Council, there needs to be something.
But we have all these demands rightfully.
So of the WHO, which doesn't have the authorities, the WHO itself only controls 20% of its own budget.
So the governments are saying, we're going to give you money to do this or that.
So we need a stronger WHO to protect us, but we also have to build that.
So looking a little bit into the future, let's first step into the past.
So there's a philosophical question about China.
If you were to put yourself in the shoes of the Chinese government, if there were to be more transparent, how should they be more transparent?
Because it's easier to say we want to see this.
But from a perspective of government, and not just the Chinese government, but a government on whose geographic territory, say it's a lab leak.
A lab leak occurred that has resulted in trillions of dollars of loss, countless of lives, just all kinds of damage to the world.
If they were to admit or show data that could serve as evidence for a lab leak, that's something that people could, like in the worst case, start wars over.
Or in the most likely case, just constantly bring that up at every turn, making you powerless in negotiations.
Whenever you want to do something in a geopolitical sense, the United States will bring up,
oh, remember that time you cost us trillions of dollars because of your fuck up?
So what is the incentive for the Chinese government to be transparent?
And if it is to be transparent, how should it do it?
So there's a bunch of people, like the reason I'm talking to you, as opposed to a bunch of other folks, because you are kind hearted and thoughtful and open minded and really respected.
There's a bunch of people that are talking about lab leak that are a little bit less interested in building a better world and more interested in pointing out the emperor has no clothes.
They want step one, which is saying basically tearing down the bullshitters.
They don't want to do the further steps of building.
So as a Chinese government, I would be nervous about being transparent with anybody that just wants to tear our power centers, our power structures down.
Anyway, that's a long way to ask, how should the Chinese government be transparent now and in the future?
So maybe I'll break that down into a few sub questions.
The first is, what should, in an ideal world, what should the Chinese government do?
And that's pretty straightforward.
They should be totally transparent.
The South African government now, there's an outbreak of this Omicron variant and the South African government has done what we would want a government to do.
Say, hey, there's an outbreak.
We don't have all of the information.
We need help.
We want to alert the world.
And in some ways, they're being punished for it through these travel bans, but it's a separate topic.
But I actually think short term travel bans actually are not a terrible idea.
They should have, on day one, if they should have allowed WHO experts in, they should have shared information.
They should have allowed a full and comprehensive investigation with international partnerships to understand what went wrong.
They should have shared their raw data.
They should have allowed their scientists to speak and write publicly because nobody knows more about this stuff, certainly in the early days than their scientists do.
So it's relatively easy to say what they should do.
It's a hard question to say, well, what would happen?
Let's just say, let's just say tomorrow.
We prove for certain that this pandemic stems from both from an accidental lab incident and then from what I've consistently called a criminal cover up because the cover up has done in many ways as much or more damage than the incident.
Well, what happens?
You could easily imagine Xi Jinping has had two terms as the leader of China.
And he can now have unlimited terms.
They've changed the rules for that, but he's got a lot of enemies.
I mean, there are a lot of people who are waiting in line to step up.
So is there a chance that Xi Jinping could be deposed if it was proven that this comes from a lab?
I think there's a real possibility.
Would people in the United States Congress, for example, demand reparations from China?
So we've had four and a half trillion dollars of stimulus, all of the economic losses.
We owe a lot of money to China from our debt.
I'm quite certain that members of Congress would say, you know, we're just going to wipe that out.
It would destroy the global financial system, but I think they would be extremely likely.
Would other countries like India that have lost millions of people and had terrible economic damages, would they demand reparations?
So I think from a Chinese perspective, starting from now, it would have major geopolitical implications and go back to Chernobyl.
There was a reason why the Soviet Union went to such length to cover things up.
And when it came out, I mean, there are different theories, but certainly Chernobyl played some role in the end of communist power in the Soviet Union.
So the Chinese are very, very aware of that.
But the difference, of course, with Chernobyl, the damage to the rest of the world was not as nearly as significant as COVID.
So you say that the cover up is a crime, but everything you just described, the response of the rest of the world is, I could say, unfair.
So if we say the best possible version of the story, you know, lab leaks happen.
They shouldn't happen, but they happen.
And how is that on the Chinese government?
I mean, what's a good example?
Well, the Union Carbide.
There was this American company operating in India.
They had this leak.
All these people were killed.
The company admitted responsibility.
I was working in the White House when the United States government, in my view, which I know to be the case, but other people in China think differently,
bombed the Chinese embassy in Belgrade.
And so the United States government allowed a full investigation.
Then we paid reparations to the family, the families.
So to your question, if I were, let's just say I were the Chinese government, not, I mean, kind of an idealized version of the Chinese government.
And let's just say that they had come to the conclusion that it was a lab incident.
And let's just say they knew that even if they continued to cover it up, eventually this information would come out.
I mean, maybe there was a whistleblower, maybe they knew of some evidence that we didn't know about or something.
What would I do starting right now?
What I would do is I would hold a press conference and we would say, and I would say, we had this terrible accident.
The reason why we were doing this research in Wuhan and elsewhere is that we had SARS 1 and we felt a responsibility to do everything possible to prevent that kind of terrible thing happening again for our country and for the world.
That was why we collaborated with France, with the United States in building up those capacities.
We know that nothing is perfect, but we're a sovereign country and we have our own system and so we had to adapt our systems so that they made sense internally.
When this outbreak began, we didn't know how it started.
And that was why we wanted to look into things.
When the process of investigating became so political, it gave us pause and we were worried that our enemies were trying to use this investigation in order to undermine us.
Having said that, now that we've dug deeper, we have recognized, because we have access to additional information that we didn't have then, that this pandemic started from an accidental lab incident.
And we feel really terribly about that and we know that we were very aggressive in covering up information in the beginning.
But the reason we were doing that is because we thoroughly, we fully believe that it came from a natural origin.
Now that we see otherwise, we feel terribly.
Therefore, we're doing a few different things.
One is we are committing ourselves to establishing a stronger WHO, a new pandemic treaty that addresses the major challenges that we face and allows the World Health Organization to pierce the veil of absolute sovereignty because we know that when these pandemics happen, they affect everybody.
We are also putting, and you can pick your number, but let's start with five trillion US dollars, some massive amount, into a fund that we will be distributing to the victims of COVID 19 and their...
China would do that?
This is a fantasy speech.
But I disagree with your...
So you think China has responsibility?
So it's not just a lab leak.
If China on day one had said, we have this outbreak, we don't know where it came from.
We want to have a full investigation.
We call on responsible international partners to join us in that process.
And we're going to do everything in our power to share the relevant information because however this started, we're all victims.
That's a totally different story than punishing Australia, preventing the WHO, blocking any investigation, condemning people who are trying to look.
So cover up for a couple of weeks, you can understand maybe because there's so much uncertainty.
You're like, oh, let's hide all the Winnie the Pooh pictures while we figure this out.
But the moment you really figure out what happened, you always, as a joke, always find like a blame the Jews kind of situation a little bit.
Just a little bit.
You're like, all right, it's not us.
I'm just kidding.
But be proactive and saying...
The joke about that is there's a big problem because a lot of people have to leave the Jewish socialist conspiracy to make it for the Jewish capitalist conspiracy meeting.
I love it.
So I would say not five trillion, but some large amount.
And I would really focus on the future, which is every time we talk about the lab leak, the unfortunate thing is I feel like people don't focus enough about the future.
To me, the lab leak is important because we want to construct a kind of framework of thinking and a global conversation that minimizes the damage done by future lab leaks, which will almost certainly happen.
And so to me, any lab leak is about the future.
I would launch a giant investment in saying we're going to create a testing infrastructure, like all of this kind of infrastructure investments that help minimize the damage of a lab leak here in the rest of the world.
So the challenge with that is, one, it's hard to imagine a fully accountable future system to prevent these kinds of terrible pandemics that's built upon obfuscation and coverup regarding the origins of this worst pandemic in a century.
So it's just like that foundation isn't strong enough.
Second, China across the fields of science is looking to leapfrog the rest of the world.
So China has current plans to build BSL for labs in every of its province.
Yeah, they're scaling up everything.
And so with the plan on leading, and that's why, again, I was saying before, I think there's a lot of similarity between this story, at least as I see it, at least the most probable case.
And these other areas where China gets knowledge and then tries to leapfrog.
It's the same with AI and autonomous killer robots.
It's the same with human genome editing, with animal experimentation, with so many, basically all areas of advanced science.
So the question is, would China stop in that process?
And then third, it's a little bit of a historical background, but defending national sovereignty is one of the core principles of, certainly, of the Chinese state.
And the historical issue is, for those of us who come from the West, one of the lessons of the postwar planners was that absolute national sovereignty was actually a major feeder into the first and second world wars.
That we had all these conflicting states.
And therefore, the logic of the postwar system is we need to, in some ways, pool sovereignty that's like the EU and have transnational organizations like the UN organizations and the Bretton Woods organizations.
For most Asian states, and also even for some African, the people who are kind of on the colonized side of history, sovereignty was the thing that was denied them.
That was the thing that they want, that the European power is denied.
And so the idea of giving up sovereignty was the absolute opposite.
And so that's why China is, and again, I mentioned this Rush Doshi book.
It's not that China is trying to strengthen this rules based international order, which is based on the principle that, well, there are certain things that we share.
And how do we build a governance system to protect those things?
What it seems to be doing is trying to advance its own sovereignty.
And so I think, I agree with you, but I don't think that we can just go forward without some accountability for the...
So the cover up was a big problem.
It's like, I find myself playing devil's advocate because I'm trying to sort of empathize.
And then I forget that like two or three people listen to this thing and then they're like, look, Lex is defending the Chinese government with their cover up.
No, I'm not, you know, I'm just trying to understand.
I mean, it's the same reason I'm reading Mein Kampf now is like, you have to really understand the minds of people as if I too could have done that.
You know, you have to understand that we're all the same to some degree.
And that kind of empathy is required to figure out solutions for the future.
It's just in empathizing with the Chinese government in this whole situation.
I'm still not sure I understand how to minimize the chance of a cover up in the future, whether for China or for the United States.
I'm not exactly sure we would be with all the emphasis we put on freedom of speech.
With all the emphasis we put on freedom of the press and access to the press to sort of all aspects of government.
I'm not sure the US government would do a similar kind of cover up.
Let me put it this way.
So we're in Texas now doing this interview.
Imagine there's a kind of horseshoe bat that we'll call the Texas horseshoe bat.
There's a lot of bats in Austin by the way.
It's true.
And so let's just say that the Texas horseshoe bats only exist in Texas.
But in Montana, we have a thing.
It's called the Montana Institute of Virology.
And at the Montana Institute of Virology, they have the world's largest collection of Texas horseshoe bats, including horseshoe bats that are associated with a previous global pandemic called the Texas horseshoe bat pandemic.
And let's just say that people in Montana, in the same town where this Montana Institute of Virology is, start getting a version of this Texas horseshoe bat syndrome that is genetically relatively similar to the outbreak in Texas.
There are no horseshoe bats there.
And the government says, it's your same point, Alina's point about the unicorns, like nothing to see here.
Just move along.
You know, I would.
No, but what's the instead?
Joe Rogan and Brett Weinstein and Josh Rogan.
And I mean, would they say, oh, I guess, I mean, I just think that.
No, no, but the point is the government going to say it.
So Joe Rogan is a comedian.
Brett Weinstein is a podcaster.
Yeah.
The point is what we want is not just those folks to have the freedom to speak.
That's important.
But you want the government to have the transparent, like, like, I don't think Joe Rogan is enough to hold the government accountable.
I think they're going to do their thing anyway.
But I think that's our system.
And that was the genius of the founding fathers.
Was that enough?
They said that the government probably is going to have a lot of instincts to do the wrong thing.
That was the experience in England before.
And so that's why we have free speech to hold the government accountable.
I mean, I'm a kind of broadly a gun control person, but the people who say, well, we need to have broad gun rights.
As somebody who's now in Texas, I am offended.
But their argument is, look, we don't fully trust the government.
If the government, just like we fought against the British, if the government's wrong, we want to at least have some authority.
So that's our system is to have that kind of voice.
And that is the public voice actually balances.
Because every government, as you correctly said, every government has the same instincts.
And that's why we have, and it's imperfect here, but kind of these ideas of separation of powers of inalienable rights so that we can have, it's almost like a vast market where we can have balance.
So you think if the lab leak occurred in the United States, what probability would you put some kind of public report led by Rand Paul would come out saying this was a lab leak?
You have good confidence that that would happen?
That would be a decent comment.
And the reason I say I mentioned that I'm a, I think of myself.
I'm sure I'm not anymore as I get older, but as a progressive person, I'm a Democrat and I worked in Democratic administrations, worked for President Clinton on the National Security Council.
But my kind of best friend in the United States Senate, who I talk to all the time, is a senator from Kansas named Roger Marshall.
And Roger, I mean, if you just lined up our positions on all sorts of things, we're radically different.
But we have a great relationship.
We talk all the time and we share a commitment to saying, well, let's ask the tough questions about how this started.
And again, if we had, like what is the United States government?
Yeah, it's the executive branch, but there's also Congress.
You talk about Rand Paul and as a former executive branch worker when I was on the National Security Council.
And I guess technically when I was at the State Department, all of this stuff, all of this process, it just seems like a pain in the ass.
It's like these, you know, efforts, they're just attacking us.
We tried to do this thing with, we had all the best intentions and now they're holding hearings and they're trying to box us in and whatever.
But that's our process.
And there's like a form of accountability as chaotic, as crazy as it is.
And so it makes it really difficult.
I mean, we have other problems of just chaos and everybody doing their own thing, but it makes it difficult to have a kind of systematic cover up.
And again, all of that is predicated on my hypothesis, not fully proven, although I think likely that there is a lab incident origin of this pandemic.
Well, I mean, we're having like several layers of conversation, but I think whether a lab leak hypothesis is true or not, it does seem that the likelihood of a cover up if it leaked from a lab is high.
And that's the more important conversation to be having.
Well, you could argue a lot of things, but to me, arguably, that's the more important conversation is about what is the likelihood of a cover up?
100%.
Like in my mind, there is a legitimate debate about the origins of the pandemic.
There are people who I respect, who I don't necessarily agree with.
People like Stuart Neil, who's a virologist in the UK, who's been very open minded, engaged in productive debate about the origin.
And you know where I stand.
There is and can be no debate about whether or not there has been a cover up.
There has been a cover up.
There is, in my mind, no credible argument that there hasn't been a cover up and we can just see it in the regulations, in the lack of access.
There's an incredible woman named Zhang Zhang, who is a Chinese, we have to call her a citizen journalist because everything is controlled by the state.
But in the early days of the pandemic, she went to Wuhan, started taking videos and posting them.
She was imprisoned for picking quarrels, which is kind of a catchall.
And now she's engaged in a hunger strike and she's near death.
And so there's no question that there has been a cover up and there's no question in my mind that that cover up is responsible for a significant percentage of the total deaths due to COVID 19.
And a pivot.
Can I talk to you about sex?
Let's roll.
Okay, so you're the author of a book, Hacking Darwin.
So humans have used sex, allegedly, as I've read about, to make genetic information to produce offspring and sort of through that kind of process, adapt to their environment.
Lex, you mentioned earlier about you're asking tough questions and people pushing you to ask tough questions.
This is...
Is it okay if I just...
So you said have done this as I've read about.
As I've read about on the internet.
Yeah.
All I'm saying as a person sitting with you to people who would be open minded in experimenting of as I've read about to reality.
What I would say is Lex Friedman is handsome, charming.
He's...
I'm going to open a Tinder account and publish this one.
Really a great guy.
I'm sorry to interrupt.
Thank you.
I appreciate that.
Okay, so I was reading about this last night.
I was going to tweet it, but then I'm like, this is going to be misinterpreted.
But it's...
This is why I like podcasts because I can say stuff like this.
It's kind of incredible to me that the average human male produces like 500 billion plus sperm cells in their lifetime.
Each one of those are genetically unique.
They can produce unique humans.
500 billion, there's like 100 billion people who's ever lived.
Maybe like 110, whatever the number is.
So it's like five times the number of people who ever lived is produced by each male of genetic information.
So those are all possible trajectories of lives that could have lived.
Like those are all little people that could have been in like all the possible stories, all the Hitlers and Einstein's that could have been created and all that.
I mean, I don't know, this kind of you're painting this possible future and we get to see only one little string of that.
I mean, I suppose the magic of that is also captured by the, in the space of physics of having like multiple dimensions and the many worlds hypothesis of quantum mechanics that the interpretation that we're basically just at every point, there's an infinite offspring of universes that are created.
But I don't know that that's just like a magic of this game of genetics that we're playing.
And the winning sperm is not the fastest.
The winning sperm is basically the luckiest as the right timing.
So it's not, I also got into this whole, I started reading papers about like, is there something to be said about who wins the race, right, genetically.
So it's fascinating because there's studies and animals and so on to answer that question because it's interesting because like, because I'm a winner, right.
I won, I won a race.
And so you want to know like, what, what does that say about me in this, in this fascinating genetic race against, I think, what is it, 200, 200 million others, I think.
So one, you know, pool of sperm cells is about something like 200 million.
It could be, yes, some, but that millions, I thought it was much, much lower than that.
So like that, those are all brothers and sisters of mine.
And I beat them all out.
I won.
And so it's interesting to know there's a temptation to say I'm somehow better than them, right.
And now that goes into the next stage of something you're or deeply thinking about.
Which is if we have more control now over the winning genetic code that becomes offspring, if we have first not even control just information and then control.
What do you think that world looks like from a biological perspective and from an ethical perspective when we start getting more information and more control.
Yeah, great, great question.
So first on the sperm, there can be up to about 1.2 billion sperm cells in a male ejaculation.
So as I mentioned in Hacking Darwin, male sperm, it's kind of a dime a dozen with all the guys in all the world just doing whatever they do with it.
And it's an open question how competitive, I mean, there is an element of luck and there is an element of competition.
And it's an open question how much that competition impacts the outcome or whether it's just luck.
But my guess is there's some combination of fitness and luck.
But you're absolutely right that all of those other sperm cells in the ejaculation, if that's how the union of sperm and egg is happening, all of them represent a different future.
And there's a wonderful book called Invisible Cities by Italo Calvino, and he even talks about a city as something like this where everybody, you have your life.
But then you have all these alternate lives, and every time you make any decision, you're kind of end so, but in this Invisible Cities, there's a little string that goes toward that alternate life.
And then the city becomes this weaving of all the strings of people's real lives and the alternate lives that they could have taken had they made any other different steps.
It's like a deep philosophical question, it's not just for us, it's baked into evolutionary biology.
It's just what are the different strategies for different species to achieve fitness.
And there are some of the different corals or other fish where they just kind of release the eggs into the water.
And there's all different kinds of ways.
And then you're right, in my book Hacking Darwin, and in the full titles Hacking Darwin, Genetic Engineering and the Future of Humanity, I kind of go deep into exploring the big picture implications of the future of human reproduction.
We are already participating in a revolutionary transformation, not just because of the diagnostics that we have, things like ultrasound.
But because now an increasing number of us are being born through in vitro fertilization, which means the eggs are extracted from the mother, they're fertilized by the father's sperm in vitro in a lab, and then re implanted in the mother.
On top of that, there's a somewhat newer but still now older technology called preimplantation genetic testing.
And so as everyone knows from high school biology, you have the fertilized egg, and then it goes one cell to two cells to four to eight and whatever.
And after around five days, in this PGT process, a few cells are extracted.
So let's say you have 10 fertilized eggs, early stage embryos.
A few cells are extracted from each, and those cells, if they would, the ones that are extracted, would end up becoming the placenta.
But every one of our cells has, other than a few, has our full genome.
And so then you sequence those cells.
And with preimplantation genetic testing now, what you can do is you can screen out deadly single gene mutation disorders, things that could be deadly or life ruining.
And so people use it to determine which of those 10 early stage embryos to implant in a mother as we shift towards a much greater understanding of genetics.
And that is part of just the broader genetics revolution.
But within that, in our transition from personalized to precision healthcare, more and more of us are going to have our whole genome sequenced because it's going to be the foundation of getting personalized healthcare.
We're going to have already millions, but very soon billions of people who've had their whole genome sequenced.
And then we'll have big databases of people's genetic, genotypic information and life or phenotypic information.
And using, coming into your area, our tools of machine learning and data analytics, we're going to be able to increasingly understand patterns of genetic expression, even though we're all different.
So predict how that genetic information will get expressed.
Never perfectly perhaps, but more and more, always more and more.
And so with that information, we aren't going to just be in the, even now, we aren't going to just be selecting based on which of these 10 early stage embryos is carrying a deadly genetic disorder.
But we can, we'll be able to know everything that can be partly or entirely predicted by genetics. And there's a lot of our humanity that fits into that category.
And certainly simple traits like height and eye color and things like that.
I mean, height is not at all simple, but if you have good nutrition, it's entirely or mostly genetic.
But even personality traits and personality styles, there are a lot of things that we see just as the experience, the beauty of life that are partly have a genetic foundation.
And so whatever part of these traits are definable and influenced by genetics, we're going to have greater and greater predictability within a range.
And so selecting those embryos will be informed by that kind of knowledge.
And that's why in Hacking Daru, when I talk about embryo selection as being a key driver of the future of human evolution.
But then on top of that, there is in 2012, Shania Yamanaka, a Japanese, amazing Japanese scientist, won the Nobel Prize for developing a process for creating what are called induced pluripotent stem cells, IPS cells.
And what IPS cells are is you can induce an adult cell to go back in evolutionary time and become a stem cell.
And a stem cell is like when we're a fertilized egg, like our entire blueprint is in that one cell, and that cell can be anything.
But then our cells start to specialize, and that's why we have skin cells and blood cells and all the different types of things.
So with the Yamanaka process, we can induce an adult cell to become a stem cell.
So the relevance to this story is what you can do, and it works now in animal models.
And as far as I know, it hasn't yet been done in humans, but it works pretty well in animal models.
You take any adult cell, but skin cells are probably the easiest.
You induce this skin cell into a stem cell.
And if you just take a little skin graft, it would have millions of cells.
So you induce those skin cells into stem cells.
Then you induce those stem cells into egg precursor cells.
Then you induce those egg precursor cells into eggs, egg cells.
Then because we have this massive overabundance of male sperm, then you could fertilize, let's call it 10,000 of the mother's eggs.
So you have 10,000 eggs which are fertilized.
Sounds like a party.
Yeah. Then you have an automated process for what I mentioned before in preimplantation genetic testing.
You grow them all for five days.
You extract a few cells from each.
You test them.
And that's why I had a piece in the New York Times a couple of years ago imagining what it would be like to go to a fertility clinic in the year 2050.
And the choice is not...
No humans involved.
Yeah.
Well, no, no, there are, but the choice is not, do you want a kid who does or doesn't have,
let's call it TaySax.
It's a whole range of possibilities, including very intimate traits like height, IQ, personality style.
It doesn't mean you can predict everything, but it means there will be increasing predictability.
So if you're choosing from 10,000 eggs, fertilized eggs, early stage embryos, that's a lot of choice.
And on top of that, then we have the new technology of human genome editing.
Many people have heard of CRISPR.
But what I say is if you think of human genome editing as a pie, human genome engineering as a pie, genome editing is a slice and CRISPR is just a sliver of that slice.
It's just one of our tools for genome editing and things are getting better and better.
Then you can go in and change, let's say, I mean, again, it starts simple.
A small number of genes, let's say you've selected from among the one of 10 or the one of 10,000.
But there are a number of changes that you would like to make to achieve some kind of outcome.
And biology is incredibly complex, and it's not that one gene does one thing.
One gene does probably a lot of things simultaneously, which is why the decision about changing one gene if it's causing deathly harm is easier than when we think about the complexity of biology.
But if the machine learning gets better and better predicting the full complexity of biology, so like as one gets better than your editing, your ability to reliably edit such that the conclusions are predictable gets better and better.
So those are two or a couple together.
Exactly.
And then so that's why, and people would say, well, that, I mean, I wrote about that in my two science fiction novels, Genesis Code and Eternal Sonata, years ago, especially with Genesis Code, I wrote about that.
And as a sci fi, and I had actually testified before Congress, but now 15 years ago saying, here's what the future looks like.
But even I, and in my first edition of Hacking Darwin, when it was already in production.
And then in November 2018, this scientist, Hu Zhongkui, announced in Hong Kong that the world's first two and later three crisper babies had been born, which he had genetically altered in and misguided in my view and dangerous view.
A dangerous goal of making it so they would have increased resistance to HIV.
And so I called my publisher, and I said, I've got good news and bad news.
I'll start with the bad news is that the world's first crisper babies have been born.
And so we need to pull my book out of production because you can't have a book on the future of human genetic engineering and have it not mentioned the first crisper babies that had been born.
But the good news is in the book, I had predicted that it's going to happen and it's going to happen in China.
And here's why.
And all we need to do is add a few more sentences in that was the hardback and then I updated it more in the paperback saying, and it happened and it was announced on this day.
Yeah.
Well, then let's fast forward.
Given your predictions are slowly becoming reality.
Let's talk about some philosophy and ethics, I suppose.
So I can, I'm not being too self deprecating here and saying if my parents had the choice, I would be probably less likely to come out the winner.
We're all weird and I'm certainly a very distinctly weird specimen of the human species.
I can give the full long list of flaws and we can be very poetic of saying like those are features and so on.
But they're not.
If you look at the menu.
Again, for these women who are listening, apropos of your thing, they're all kind of charming individualities.
Yeah, so it's beautiful.
That's one.
Yes, thank you.
Anyway, but on the full sort of individual, let's say IQ alone, right?
What do we do about a world where IQ could be selected on a menu when you're having children?
What concerns you about that world?
What excites you about that world?
Are there certain metrics that excite you more than others?
IQ has been a source of.
I don't know.
I'm not sure IQ as a measure flawed as it is has been used to celebrate the successes of the human species nearly as much as has been used to divide people to say negative things about people.
To make negative claims about people.
And in that same way, it seems like when there's a selection or genetic selection based on IQ, you can start now having classes of citizenry and like further divide.
The rich get richer.
You know, it'll be very rich people, they'll be able to do kind of fine selection of IQ and they will start forming these classes of super intelligent people.
And those super intelligent people in their minds would of course be the right people to be making global authoritarian decisions about everybody else, all the usual aspects of human nature, but now magnified with the new tools of technology.
Anyway, all that to say is what's exciting to you or what's concerning to you?
It's a great question.
And just stepping into the IQ, we'll call it a quagmire for now.
It raises a lot of big issues which are complicated.
Maybe you've listened to Sam Harris's interview with Charles Murray and then that spawned out kind of a whole industry of debate.
So first, just the background of IQ and it's from the early 20th century and there was the idea that we can measure people's general intelligence and there are so many different kinds of intelligence.
This was measuring a specific thing.
So my feeling is that IQ is not a perfect measure of intelligence, but it's a perfect measure of IQ.
Like it's measuring what it's measuring, but that thing correlates to a lot of things which are rewarded in our society.
So every study of IQ has shown that people with higher IQs, they make more money, they live longer, they have more stable relationships.
That could be something in the testing, but as Sam Harris has talked about a lot, you could line up all of these kind of IQ and IQ like tests correlate with each other.
So the people who score high on one score high on all of them and people think that IQ tests are like a thing like the Earl of Dorchester is coming for dinner.
Does he have two forks or three forks or something like that?
It's not that.
A lot of them are things that I think a lot of us would recognize are relevant, just like how much stuff can you memorize if you see some shapes, how can you position them and things like that.
And so IQ, I mean, it really hit its stride and certainly in the Second World War when our governments were processing a lot of people and trying to figure out who to put in what jobs.
So that's the starting point.
Let me start first with the negatives that our societies, when we talk about diversity in Darwinian terms, it's not like diversity is from Darwinian terms.
Oh, wouldn't it be nice if we have some moths of different colors because it'll be really fun to have different colored moths?
Diversity is the sole survival strategy of our species and of every species.
And it's impossible to predict what diversity is going to be rewarded.
And I've said this before, if you went down and you had, if you spoke T. rex and you spoke to the dinosaurs and said, hey, you can select your kids.
What criteria do you want?
And they say, oh yeah, sharp teeth, cruel fangs, roar, whatever it is that makes you a great T. rex.
But the answer from an evolutionary perspective, from an Earth perspective was always much better to be like a cockroach or an alligator or some little nothing or a little shrew because the dinosaurs are going to get wiped out when the asteroid hits.
And so there's no better or worse in evolution.
There's just better or worse suited for a given environment.
And when that environment changes, the best suited person from the old system could be the worst suited person for the new one.
So if we start selecting for the things that we value the most, including things like IQ, but even disease resistance.
I mean, this is well known, but if people who are recessive carrier of sickle cell disease have increased resistance to malaria, which is the biggest reason why that trait hasn't just disappeared, given how deadly sickle cell disease is.
Biology is incredibly complex.
We understand such a tiny percentage of it that we need to have, in your words, just a level of humility.
There are huge equity issues as you've articulated.
Let's just say that it is the case that in our society IQ and IQ like traits are highly rewarded.
There isn't an equity issue, but it works in both ways.
Because my guess is let's just say that we had a society where we were doing genome sequencing of everybody who was born and we had some predictive model to predict IQ.
And we had decided as a society that IQ was going to be what we were going to select for.
We were going to put the highest IQ people in these different roles.
I guarantee you the people in those roles would not be the people who are legacy admissions to Harvard.
They would very likely be people who are born in slums, people who are born with no opportunity or in refugee camps who are just wasting away because we've thrown them away.
It's the idea of just being able to look under the hood of our humanity is really scary for everybody and it should be.
I'm also an Ashkenazi Jew.
My father was born in Austria.
My father and grandparents came here as refugees after the war.
Most of that side of the family was killed.
So I get what it means to be on the other side of the story when someone said, well, here's what's good and you're not good.
So I totally get that.
Having said that, I do believe that we're moving toward a new way of procreating.
And we're going to have to decide what are the values that we would like to realize through that process.
Is it randomness, which is what we currently have now, which is not totally random because we have a sort of mating through colleges and other things.
When mating through what? Colleges?
If you go to Harvard or wherever and your wife also goes to Harvard, it's like a location based mating.
Well, it's not location, it's selection.
It's like there are selections that are made about who gets to a certain place and when it's like Harvard admissions is a filter.
So we're going to have to decide what are the values that we want to realize through this process because diversity, it's just baked into our biology.
We're the first species ever that has the opportunity to make choices about things that were otherwise baked into our biology.
And there's a real danger that if we make bad choices, even with good intentions, it could even drive us toward extinction and certainly undermine our humanity.
And that's why I always say, and like I said, I'm deeply involved with WHO and other things, that these aren't conversations about science.
Science brings us to the conversation, but the conversation is about values and ethics.
As you described, that world is wide open. It's not even a subtly different world.
That world is fundamentally different from anything we understand about life on earth because natural selection, this random process is so fundamental how we think about life.
Being able to program, I mean, it has a chance to, I mean, it'll probably make my question about the ethical concerns around IQ based selection just meaningless.
Because it'll change the nature of identity.
Like it's possible it will dissolve identity because we take so much pride in all the different characteristics that make us who we are.
Whenever you have some control over those characteristics, those characteristics start losing meaning.
And what may start gaining meaning is the ideas inside our heads, for example, versus like the details of like, is it a Commodore 64?
Is it a PC? Is it a Mac? It's going to be less important than the software that runs on it.
So we can more and more be operating in the digital space and the identity could be something that borrows multiple bodies.
Like the legacy of our ideas may become more important than the details of our physical embodiment.
I mean, I'm saying perhaps ridiculous sounding things, but the point is it will bring up so many new ethical concerns that are narrow minded thinking about the current ethical concerns will not apply.
But it's important to think about all this kind of stuff like actively.
What are the right conversations to be having now?
Because it feels like it's an ongoing conversation that then continually evolves like with an NIH involved.
Like do you do experiments with animals? Do you build these brain organoids?
Like through that process you describe with the stem cells, like do you experiment with a bunch of organisms to see how genetic material,
what form that actually takes, how to minimize the chance of cancer and all those kinds of things.
What are the negative consequences of that? What are the positive consequences?
Yeah, it's a fascinating world. It's a really fascinating world.
Yeah, but those conversations are just so essential.
Like we have to be talking about ethics and then that raises the question of who is the we?
And coming back to your conversation about science communication,
maybe there was a time earlier when these conversations were held among a small number of experts who made decisions on behalf of everybody else.
But what we're talking about here is really the future of our species.
And I think that conversation is too important to be left just to experts and government officials.
So I mentioned that I'm a member, we just ended our work after two years of the World Health Organization Expert Advisory Committee on Human Genome Editing.
And my big push in that process was to have education, engagement and empowerment of the broad public to bring,
not just bring people into the conversation with the tools to be able to engage,
but also into the decision making process.
And that's, it's a real shift and there are countries that are doing it better than others.
I mean, Denmark is obviously a much smaller country than the United States,
but they have a really well developed infrastructure for public engagement around really complicated scientific issues.
And I just think that we have to, like it's great that we have Twitter and all these other things.
But we need structured conversations where we can really bring people together and listen to each other,
which feels like it's harder than ever.
But even now in this process where all these people are shouting at each other,
at least there are a bunch of people who are in the conversation.
So we have a foundation, but we just really need to do more work.
And again and again and again, it's about ethics and values because we're at an age,
and this has become a cliche of exponential technological change.
And so the rate of change is faster going forward than it has been in the past.
So in our minds, we under appreciate how quickly things are changing and will change.
And if we're not careful, if we don't know who we are and what our values are,
we're going to get lost and we don't have to know technology.
We have to know who we are.
Our values are hard won over thousands of years.
No matter how new the technology is, we shouldn't and can't jettison our values
because that is our primary navigational tool.
Absurd question because we were saying that sexual reproduction is not the best way to define the offspring.
You think there'll be a day when humans stop having sex?
I don't think we'll stop having sex because it's so enjoyable.
But we may significantly stop having sex for reproduction.
Even today, most human sex is not for making babies.
It's for other things, whether it's pleasure or love or pair bonding or whatever.
Intimacy.
Some people do it for intimacy.
Some people do it for pleasure with strangers.
I feel like the people that do it for pleasure, I feel like there will be better ways to achieve that same chemical pleasure.
There's just so many different kinds of people.
I just saw this on television, but there are people who put on those big bunny outfits and go and have sex with other people.
There's just an unlimited number of different kinds of people.
I remember hearing about this.
I think Dan Savage is a podcast.
I think they're called Furries.
Furries.
Furry parties.
Exactly.
I love people.
That's the thing.
Whenever you hear these words, it's like humans.
What will they think of next?
I do think, and I write about this in hacking Darwin, that as people come to believe that making children through the application of science
is safer and more beneficial than having children through sex, we'll start to see a shift over time toward reproduction through science.
We'll still have sex for all the same great reasons that we do it now.
It's just reproduction less and less through the act of sex.
Man, it's such a fascinating future.
As somebody I value flaws, I think it's the goodwill hunting.
That's the good stuff.
The flaws, the weird quirks of humans, that's what makes us who we are, the weird.
The weird is the beautiful.
There's a fear of optimization that I...
You should have it.
I mean, it's very healthy.
I think that's the danger of all of this selection is that we make selections just based on social norms that are so deeply internal that they feel like they're eternal truths.
We talked about selecting for IQ.
What about selecting for a kind heart?
There are lots of people who talked about Hitler and Mein Kampf Hitler had certainly had a high IQ and I guess is higher than average IQ.
That's why I was saying before, diversity is baked into our biology.
The key lesson, and I've said this many times before, the key lesson of this moment in our history is that after nearly 4 billion years of evolution, our one species suddenly has the unique and increasing ability to read, write, and hack the code of life.
So as we apply these godlike powers that we've now assumed for ourselves, we better be pretty careful because it's so easy to make mistakes, particularly mistakes that are guided by our best intentions.
To jump briefly back on the lab leak, and I swear there's a reason for that, what did you think about the John Stuart this moment?
I forget when it was, maybe a few months ago in the summer, I think of 2021, where he went on Colbert Report, or not the Colbert Report, sorry, the Stephen Colbert's whatever his show is.
Again, John Stuart reminded us how valuable his wit and brilliance within the humor was for our culture.
And so he did this whole bit that highlighted the common sense nature about what was the metaphor he used about the Hershey factory in Pennsylvania.
So what did you think about that whole bit?
I loved it. And so not to be overly self referential, but it's hard not to be overly self referential when you're doing whatever, however long we are, five hour interview about yourself.
Which he reminds like when you had Brett Weinstein on, he said, I have no ego, but these 57 people have screwed me over.
It's hard. I am a person I will confess, it's enjoyable. Some people feel different. I kind of like talking about all this stuff and talking, period.
So for me, in the earliest, I remember those early days of when the pandemic started, I was just sitting down, it was late January or early February, 2020.
And I just was laying out all of the evidence that I could collect, trying to say, make sense of where does this come from?
And it was just logic. It was all of the things that John Stuart said, which in some overly wordy form were all at that time on my website.
Like, what are the odds of having this outbreak of a bad coronavirus more than a thousand miles away from where these bats have their natural habitat?
Where they have the largest collection of these bat coronaviruses in the world, and they're doing all these very aggressive research projects to make them more aggressive.
And then you have the outbreak of a virus that's primed for human to human transmission.
It was just logic was my first step, and I kept gathering the information.
But John Stuart distilled that in a way that just everybody got.
And I think that, like, I loved it. And I just think that there's a way of reaching people. It's the reason why I write science fiction in addition to thinking and writing about the science is that we kind of have to reach people where they are.
And I just thought it was just, there was a lot of depth, I thought, and maybe that's too self serving, but like in the analysis, but he captured that into the, into those things about, it's like the, whatever, the chewy, the outbreak of chewy goodness near the Hershey factory.
I wonder where that came from.
Yeah, there's the humor, there's metaphor. Also, the, like sticking with the joke when the audience is in the audience and Stephen Colbert, he was like resisting it.
He was very uncomfortable with it. Maybe that was part of the bit. I'm not sure, but it didn't look like it.
So Stephen, in that moment, kind of represented the discomfort of the scientific community. I think it's kind of interesting, that whole dynamic. And I think that was a pivotal moment.
That just kind of highlights the value of comedy, the value of, like when Joe Rogan says, I'm just a comedian. I mean, that's such a funny thing to say. It's like saying, I'm just a podcaster or I'm just a writer. I'm just a, you know, that ability in so few words to express what everybody else is thinking.
It's so refreshing. And I wish the scientific communicators would do that too. A little humor, a little humor. I mean, that's why I love Elon Musk very much.
So like the way he communicates is like, it's so refreshing for a CEO of a major company, several major companies, to just have a sense of humor and say ridiculous shit every once in a while.
That's so, there's something to that. Like it shakes up the whole conversation to where it gives you freedom to like think publicly.
If you're always trying to say the proper thing, you lose the freedom to think, to reason out, to be authentic and genuine.
When you allow yourself the freedom to regularly say stupid shit, have fun, make fun of yourself, I think you give yourself freedom to really be a great scientist.
Honestly, I think scientists have a lot to learn from comedians.
Well, for sure. I think we all do about just distilling and communicating in ways that people can hear.
And a lot of us say things and people just can't hear them either because of the way we're saying them or where they are.
And like I said before, I'm a big fan of Joe Rogan. I've been on his show twice.
And whatever it would, Francis Collins was in his conversation with you, he said, which I think makes sense, is that when somebody has that kind of platform and people rightly or wrongly who follow them and look to them for guidance,
I do think that there is some responsibility for people in those roles to make whatever judgment that they make and to share that.
And as I mentioned to you when we were off mic, Sanjay Gupta is a very close friend of mine. We've been friends for many years.
And I fully supported Sanjay's instinct to go on the Joe Rogan show.
I thought it was great. At the end of that whole conversation, Joe said, well, I'm just a comedian. What do I know?
And I just felt that, yes, Joe Rogan is a comedian. I wouldn't say just a comedian among other things.
But I also felt that he had a responsibility for just saying whatever he believed, even if he believed or believes, as I think is the case, that Ivermectin should be studied more, which I certainly agree.
And that healthy people shouldn't get vaccinated, healthy young people, which I don't agree.
I just felt at the end of that conversation to say, well, I'm just a comedian. What do I know?
I feel like it didn't fully integrate the power that a person like Joe Rogan has to set the agenda.
So I think the reason he says I'm just a comedian is the same reason I say I'm an idiot, which I truly believe.
I could explain exactly what I mean by that, but it's more for him or in this case for me to just keep yourself humble. Because I think it's a slippery slope when you think you have a responsibility to then think you actually have an authority.
Because a lot of people listen to you, you think you have an authority to actually speak to those people and you have enough authority to know what the hell you're talking about.
And I think there's just the humility to just kind of make it fun of yourself that's extremely valuable and saying I'm just a comedian.
And I think it's a reminder to himself that, you know, he's often full of shit, so are all of us.
And so that's a really powerful way for himself to keep himself humble.
I mean, I think that's really useful to in some kind of way for people in general to make fun of themselves a little bit in whatever way that means.
And saying I'm just a comedian is just one way to do that.
Now that couple that with the responsibility of doing the research and really having an open mind and all those kinds of stuff.
I think that's something that Joe does really well on a lot of topics, but he can't do that and everything.
And so it's up to the people to decide how well he does it on certain topics and not others.
But how do you think Sanjay did in that conversation?
So I know I'm going to get myself into trouble here because Sanjay is a very close friend.
Joe, my personal interaction with him has been our two interviews, but it's like my interview with now.
If you sit down with somebody for four hours, it's a lot and great and then private communication.
So I am personally more sympathetic to the arguments that Sanjay was making or trying to make.
I believe that the threat of the virus is greater than the threat of the vaccine.
That doesn't mean that we can guarantee 100% safety for the vaccine, but these are really well tolerated vaccines.
And we know for all the reasons we've been talking about, this is a really scary virus and particularly the mRNA vaccines.
What they're basically doing is getting your body to replicate a tiny little piece of the virus, the spike protein, and then your body responds to that.
And so that's a much less of an insult to your body than being infected by the virus.
So I'm more sympathetic to the people who say, well, everybody should get vaccinated, but people who've already been infected,
we should study whether they need to be vaccinated or not.
Having said all of that, I felt that Joe Rogan won the debate.
And the reason that I felt that he won the debate was they had two different categories of arguments.
So Sanjay, what he was trying to do, which I totally respect, was saying there's so much animosity on these different sides.
And let's lower the temperature, let's model that we can have a respectful dialogue with each other where we can actually listen.
And Sanjay, again, I've known him for many years, he's a very empathic, humble, just an all around wonderful human being.
And I really love him.
And so he was making cases that were based on kind of averages, studies and things like that.
And Joe was saying, well, I know a guy whose sister's cousin had this experience.
And I'm sure that it's all true in the sense that we have millions of people who are getting vaccinated and different things.
And what Sanjay should have said was, I know that's anecdote.
Here's another anecdote of like when Francis Collins was with you and he talked about the world wrestling guy who was like 6x6 and a big, muscly guy.
And then he got COVID and he was anti vax and then he got COVID and almost died.
And he said, I'm going to...
By the way, I don't know if you know this part.
No.
This is funny. Joe's going to listen to this.
He's going to be laughing.
Does Joe listen to the four hours of this in addition to the three hours of his interviews every day?
Well, not every day, but he listens to a lot of these and we talk about it.
We argue about it.
Hi, Joe.
Hey, Joe.
We love you, Joe.
So that particular case, I don't know why Francis said what he said there, but that's not accurate.
Oh, really?
So the wrestler never...
He didn't almost die.
It was no big deal at all for him.
And he said that to him.
I think I'm not sure... I think something got mixed up in Francis's memory.
There was another case he must have been like...
Because I don't imagine he would bring that case up and just make it up.
Because it's like, why?
But that was not at all...
That was a pretty public case.
He had an interview with him.
That wrestler, he was just fine.
So that anecdotal case...
I mean, Francis should not have done that.
So I have a bunch of criticism of how that went.
People who criticize that interview, I feel like don't give enough respect to the full range of things that Francis Collins has done in his career.
He's an incredible scientist.
And I also think a really good human being.
But yes, that conversation was flawed in many ways.
And one of them was why when you're trying to present some kind of critical...
Like criticize Joe Rogan, why bring up anecdotal evidence at all?
And if you do bring up anecdotal evidence, which is not scientific.
If you're a scientist, you should not be using anecdotal evidence.
If you do bring it up, why bring up one that's not...
That's first not true.
And you know it's not true.
So I know that pretend...
So you don't know it's not true.
So yes, that would find another case where...
So the basic thing in coming back to Sanjay and Joe's conversation was that Sanjay was trying to use statistical evidence and Joe was using anecdotal evidence.
And so I think that for Sanjay, and there are all kinds of things where there are debates where often the person who's better at debating wins...
Wins the debate regardless of the topic.
So I think what Sanjay could have done, and Sanjay is such a smart guy, is to say, well, that's an anecdote.
Here's another anecdote, and there are lots of different anecdotes.
And there certainly are people who have taken the vaccine and have had problems that could reasonably be traced to the vaccines.
And there are certainly lots of people, I would argue, more people who've not had the vaccine, but who've gotten COVID and have either died or our hospitals are now full of people who weren't vaccinated.
In many ways, I mean, our emergency rooms are full of unvaccinated people here in the United States.
So I think what Sanjay could have done, but there was a conflict between wanting to kind of win the debate and wanting to take the temperature down.
And what he could have done is to say, well, here's an anecdote.
I have a counter anecdote, and we can go on all day.
But here's what the statistics show.
And I think that was the things.
I think it's a healthy conversation.
There are a lot of people who are afraid of the vaccine.
There are a lot of people who don't trust the scientific establishment, and lots of them have good reason.
I mean, it's not just people think of like Trump Republicans, there are lots of people in the African American community who've had a historical, terrible experience with the Tuskegee and all sorts of things.
So they don't trust the messages that were being delivered up.
I live in New York City, and we had a piece in the New York Times where in the earliest days of the vaccines, there was this big movement.
Let's make sure that the poorest people in the city have first access to the vaccines because they're the ones, they have higher density in their homes, they're relying on public transport.
So there's this whole liberal effort.
And then in the black community in New York, according to the New York Times, there was very low acceptance of the vaccines.
And they interviewed people in that article, and they said, well, if the white people want us to have it first, there must be something wrong with it.
They must be doing something.
And so we have to listen to each other.
Like I would never, I mean, I have a disrespect for everybody.
And if somebody is cautious about the vaccine for themselves or for their children, we have to listen to that.
And at the same time, public health is about creating public health. And there's no doubt. I think Joe was absolutely right that older people, obese people are at greater risk for being harmed or killed by COVID 19 than young healthy people.
But by everybody getting vaccinated, we reduce the risk to everybody else. And so I feel like, like with everything, there's the individual benefit argument.
And then there's the community argument. And I absolutely think.
I'm expressing that clearly, that there's a difference between the individual health and freedoms and the community health and freedoms and steel manning each side of this. So this is one of the problems that people don't do enough of is be able to.
So how do you just steel man an argument? You describe that argument in the best possible way. You have to first understand that argument. Let's go to the non controversial thing like flat earth.
Like most people, most colleagues of mine at MIT, don't even read about like the full argument that the flat earthers make.
I feel it's disingenuous for people in the physics community to roll their eyes at flat earthers. If they haven't read their arguments, you should feel bad that you don't read their arguments.
And like, it's the rolling of the eyes. That's a big problem. You haven't read it. Your intuition says that these are a bunch of crazy people. Okay.
But you don't get, you haven't earned the right to roll your eyes. You've earned your right to maybe not read it, but then don't have an opinion.
Don't roll your eyes. Don't do any of that dismissive stuff. And the same thing in the scientific community around COVID and so on.
There's often this kind of saying, oh, cut, that's conspiracy theories. That's misinformation without actually looking into what they're saying.
If you haven't looked into what they're saying, then don't talk about it. Like if you're a scientific leader and the communicator, you need to look into it. It's not that much effort.
I totally agree. And I think that humility, it's a constant theme of your podcast. And I love that.
And so after the conversation, debate, whatever it was between Sanjay and Joe, I reached out on Twitter to someone I've never met in person.
But I'm in touch privately to a guy named Daniel Griffin, who's a professor at Columbia Medical School and just so smart.
He gives regular updates on COVID 19 on a thing called TWIV this week in virology. I'm a critic of TWIV for its coverage of pandemic origins.
But on this issue, on just having regular updates, Daniel is great. And so I said to him, I said, why don't we have an honest process to get the people who are raising concerns about the vaccines in their own words?
To raise what are their concerns? And then let's do our best job of saying, well, here are these concerns. And then here is our evidence making a counterclaim.
And here are links to if you want to look at the studies upon which these claims are made, here they are.
And Daniel, who's incredibly busy, I mean, he reads every, I mean, it seems every paper that comes out every week and it's unbelievable.
But he sent me a link to the CDC Q&A page on the CDC website. And it wasn't that. It was people who were, I mean, it was written by people like me, who were convinced in the benefit of these vaccines.
So the questions were framed, they were kind of like, they weren't really the framing of the people with the concerns, they were framing of people who were just kind of imagining something else.
I mean, you always talk about kind of humility and active listening. I know you don't mean, and it doesn't mean that we don't stand for something.
Like I certainly am a strong proponent of vaccines and masks and all of those things. But if we don't hear the other people, we don't let them hear their voice in the conversation.
If it's just saying, well, you may think this and here's why it's wrong, the argument may be right, it'll just never break through.
By the way, my interpretation of Joe and Sanjay, I listened to that conversation without looking at Twitter or the internet. And I thought that was a great conversation and I thought Sanjay actually really succeeded in bringing the temperature down.
To me, the goal was bringing the temperature down. I didn't even think of it as a debate. I was like, oh, cool. This isn't going to be some weird, it's like two friendly people talking.
And then I look at the internet and then the internet says, Joe Rogan slam such like, as if it was a heated debate that Joe won.
And it's like, all right, it's really the temperature being brought down, real conversation between two humans that wasn't really a debate.
It was just a conversation. And that was a success.
I definitely think it was a success. But I also felt that a takeaway, because this is something that I don't agree with, even though I have great, as I've said, respect for Joe,
I think a reasonable person listening to that conversation would come away with the conclusion that all in all these vaccines are a good thing.
But if you're young and healthy, you probably don't need it. And I just felt that there was a stronger case to be made, even though Sanjay made it.
It wasn't that Sanjay didn't make it. It was just that in the flow of that conversation, I felt that the case for the vaccines, and the vaccines both as an individual choice,
and then certainly, again, as I said before, I think that while people can be afraid of the vaccines, the virus itself is much scarier.
And we're seeing it now in real time with these variations and variants.
I just felt that that was kind of the rough takeaway from that conversation.
And I felt that Sanjay, again, whom I love, I felt it could have made his case a little bit stronger.
So the way the thing he succeeded is he didn't come off as like a science expert looking down at everybody, talking down to everybody.
So he succeeded in that, which is very respectful.
But I also think making the case for taking the vaccine where when you're a young, healthy person, when you're sitting across from Joe Rogan is like a high difficulty on the video game level.
For sure.
So it's difficult to do.
Yeah, for sure.
It's difficult to do.
And also it's difficult to do because it's not like, it's not as simple as like look at the data.
There's a lot of data to go through here.
Yeah.
And there's also a lot of non data stuff, like the fact that, first of all, questioning the sources of the data, the quality of the data,
because it's also disappointing about COVID is that the quality of the data is not great, but also questioning all the motivations of the different parties involved,
whether it's major organizations that develop the vaccine, whether it's major institutions like NIH or NIA that are sort of communicating to us about the vaccine,
whether it's the CDC and the WHO, whether it's the Biden or the Trump administration, whether it's China and all those kinds of things.
You have to, that's part of the conversation here.
I mean, vaccination is not just a public health tool.
It's also a tool for a government to gain more control over the populace.
Like there's a lot of truth to that too.
Things that have a lot of benefit can also be used as a Trojan horse to increase bureaucracy and control.
But that has to be on the table for a conversation.
Yeah, I think it has to be on the conversation.
But I mean, your parents, when they were in the Soviet Union and here in the United States, and actually it was a big collaboration between US and the Soviet Union,
when the polio vaccine came out, there were people all around the world who had a different life trajectory, no longer living in fear.
And all of these people who were paralyzed or killed from polio, smallpox has been eradicated.
It was one of the great successes in human history.
And while it for sure is true that you could imagine some kind of fraudulent vaccination effort,
but here I genuinely think, I mean, whatever the number, 15 million, 16 million is the economist number of dead from COVID 19.
Many, many, many more people would be dead but for these vaccines.
And so I get that any activity that needs to be coordinated by a central government has the potential to increase bureaucracy and increase control.
But there are certain things that central governments do like the development, particularly these mRNA vaccines, which it's purely a US government victory.
I mean, it was huge DARPA funding and then the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Disease NIH funding.
I mean, this was a public private partnership throughout and that we got a working vaccine in 11 months was a miracle.
It's not purely a victory.
Again, you have to be open minded.
I'm with you here playing a bit of devil's advocate, but the people who discuss any viral drugs like hypermectin and other alternatives would say that the extreme focus on the vaccine distracted us from considering other possibilities.
And saying that this is purely a success is distracting from the story that there could have been other solutions.
So yes, it's a huge success that the vaccine was developed so quickly and surprisingly way more effective than it was hoped for.
But there could have been other solutions and they completely distracted from us from that.
In fact, it distracted us from looking into a bunch of things like the lab leak.
So it's not a pure victory and there's a lot of people that criticize the overreach of government and all of this.
One of the things that makes the United States great is the individualism and the hesitancy to ideas of mandates.
Even if the mandates on mass will have a positive, even strongly positive result, many Americans will still say no because in the long arc of history, saying no in that moment will actually lead to a better country and a better world.
So that's a messed up aspect of America, but it's also a beautiful part.
We're skeptical even about good things.
I agree.
And certainly we should all be cautious about government overreach.
Absolutely.
And it happens in all kinds of scenarios with incarceration, with a thousand things.
And we also should be afraid of government underreach that if there is a problem that could be solved by governments and that's why we have governments in the first place is that there's just certain things that individuals can't do on their own.
And that's why we pool our resources and we in some ways sacrifice our rights for this common thing.
And that's why we don't have hopefully people, murderers, marauding or people driving 200 miles down the street that we have a process for arriving at a set of common rules.
And so, well, I fully agree that we need to respect and we need to listen.
We need to find that right balance.
And you've raised the magic I word, ivermectin.
And so in ivermectin, like my view has always been ivermectin could be effective.
It could not be effective.
Let's study it through a full process.
And when you had Francis Collins with you, even while he was making up stories about this wrestler, he was saying, yeah, exactly.
But he was saying that they're going to do a full randomized highest level trial of ivermectin and if ivermectin works, then that's another tool in our toolbox.
And I think we should.
And I think that Sanjay was absolutely correct to concede the point to Joe that it was disingenuous for people, including people on CNN, to say that ivermectin is for livestock.
And so I definitely think that we have to have some kind of process that allows us to come together.
And I totally agree that the great strength of America is that we empower individuals.
It's the history of our frontier mentality in our country.
So I 100% agree that we have to allow that even if sometimes it creates messy processes and uncomfortable feelings and all those sorts of things.
You are an ultramarathon runner.
Yes.
What are you running from?
No.
It's the funny thing is, so I'm an ultramarathon runner and I've done 13 Ironmans and people say, oh my God, that's amazing.
13 Ironmans and what I always say, no, one Ironman is impressive.
13 Ironmans, there's something effing wrong with you.
We just need to figure out what it is.
Yeah, there's some demons you're trying to work through.
I mean, what you're doing the work though, most people just kind of let the demons sit in the attic.
No, what have you learned about yourself, about your mind, about your body, about life from taking your body limit in that kind of way to running those kinds of distances?
Well, it's a great question.
I know that you are also kind of exploring the limits of the physical.
And so for me in doing the Ironmans and the ultramarathons, it's always the same kind of lesson, which is just when you think you have nothing left, you actually have a ton left.
There are a lot of resources that are there if you call on them and the ability to call on them has to be cultivated.
And so for me, especially in the Ironman, and Ironman in many ways is harder than the ultramarathons.
Because I'll be at, I mean, it's 140 miles, I'll be at 100 mile, 120, having done the swim and then the bike and I'll be whatever, six miles into the run.
And I'll think, I feel like shit.
I have nothing left.
How am I possibly going to run 20 miles more?
But there's always more.
And I think that for me, these extreme sports are my process of exploring what is what's possible.
And I feel like it applies in so many different areas of life where you're kind of pushing and it feels like the limit.
And one of my friend of mine, who I just have so much respect for, who actually be a great guest if you haven't already interviewed him, is Charlie Engel.
And Charlie, he was a drug addict, he was in prison, his life was total shit.
And somehow, and I can't remember the full story, he just started running around the prison yard.
And it's like Forrest Gump, he just kept running and running and then he got out of prison and he kept running and he started doing ultramarathons, started inspiring all these other people.
Now he's written all these books.
As a matter of fact, we just spoke a few months ago that he's planning on running from the Dead Sea to somehow to the top of Mount Everest from the lowest point to the highest point on Earth.
And I said, well, why are you stopping there?
Why don't you get whatever camera in and go down to the lowest part of the ocean, go to the lowest part of the ocean and then talk to Elon Musk or Jeff Bezos and go to the kind of the highest place in the stratosphere you can get.
But it's this thing of possibility and I just feel like so many of us and myself included, we get stuck in a sense of what we think is our range.
And if we're not careful, that can become our range.
And that's why for me in all of life, it's all about, like we've been talking about, challenging the limits, challenging assumptions, challenging ourselves.
And hopefully, you know, we do it in a way that kind of doesn't hurt anybody.
You know, when I'm at the Ironman, they have all these little kids and have these little shirts and it'll say, like, my dad is a hero and have the little Ironman logo.
And I want to say it's like, no, your dad is actually a narcissistic dick who goes on eight mile bike rides every Sunday rather than spend time with you.
And so we shouldn't hurt anybody.
But for me, I also find it very enjoyable and I hope I'm not disclosing too much about our conversation before we went live where you're doing so many different things with running and your martial arts.
And I encourage you to do ultramarathons because there's so many great ones in Texas.
It's actually surprisingly a very enjoyable way to spend a day.
How would you recommend, so yeah, for people who might not know, I've never actually even run a marathon.
I've run 22 miles at one time at most.
I did the 4x4x48 challenge with David Goggins where you run four miles every four hours.
It's less to do with the distance and more to do with the sleep deprivation.
What advice would you give to a first time ultramarathon like me trying to run 50 or more miles?
Or for anybody else interested in this kind of exploration of their range?
Yeah, what I always tell is the same advice is register.
Pick your timeline of when you think you can be ready, depending on where you are now.
Make it six months, make a year, and then register for the race.
And then once you're registered, just work back from there what's it going to take.
But one of the things for people who are just getting going, you really do need to make sure that your body is ready for it.
And so particularly as we get older, strengthening is really important.
So I'll do a plug for my brother, Jordan Metzel.
He's a doctor at hospital for special surgery, but his whole thing is functional strength.
And people know about, and you can actually even go to his website.
You can just Google Jordan Metzel, Iron Strength.
But it's all about burpees and just building your muscular strength so that you don't get injured as you increase.
And then just increase your mileage in some steady way.
Make sure that you take rest days and listen to your body because people like you who are just very kind of mind over matter,
like you were telling me before about you have an injury, but you kind of run a little bit differently.
And we need to listen to our bodies because our bodies are communicating.
But I think if it's kind of little by little, magic is possible.
And what I will say is, and I've done lots and lots of marathons,
and I always tell people that the ultra marathons, at least the ones that I do,
and I shouldn't misrepresent myself.
I mean, there are people who do 500 mile races.
The ones that I do are 50k mountain trail runs, which is 32 miles.
So I do the kind of the easier side of ultras.
But it's actually much easier than a marathon because the mountain ones, sometimes it's so steep that you have to walk it
because walking is faster than running.
And every four or five miles in the supported races, you stop and eat blinces and foiled potatoes.
It's actually quite enjoyable.
But as I started to tell you before we went live,
I've done for lots of years these 50k mountain trail runs and I was going to Taiwan a number of years ago for something else.
And I thought, well, wouldn't it be fun to do an ultra marathon in Taiwan?
I looked and the weekend after my visit, there was a marathon.
It was called the ultra marathon.
It was called the Taiwan Beast.
And I figured, oh, beasts, what are they talking about?
It's 50k mountain trail and I've done a million of them.
And then I went to register.
And then as part of registration, they said, you need to have all of this equipment.
And there was all this wilderness survival equipment.
And I was thinking, God, these Taiwanese, what a bunch of whims.
Wait a dramatic.
You have to carry.
Give me a break.
50k mountain trail.
So I get there and the race starts at 4.30 in the morning in the middle of nowhere.
And you have to wear headlamps and everyone's carrying all this stuff.
And you kind of go running out into the rainforest.
It was the hardest thing I've ever done.
It took 19 hours.
There were maybe 15 cliff faces, like a real cliff.
And somebody had dangled like a little piece of string.
And so they had to hold on to the string with one hand while it was in the pouring rain.
Climb up these cliffs.
There were maybe 20 river crossings, but not just like a little stream, like a torrential
river.
There were some things where it was so steep that everyone was just climbing up and then
you'd slide all the way down and climb up.
And people I met on the way out there who were saying, oh yeah, I did the Sahara 500
kilometer race and those people were just sprawled out.
A lot of them didn't finish.
So that was the hardest thing I've ever.
So how do you get through something like that?
You're just one step at a time.
Do you remember, is there dark moments or is it kind of all spread out thinly?
It wasn't really dark moments.
There was one thing where I'd been running so long, I thought, well, I must almost be
done.
And then I found out I had like 15 miles more.
But I guess with all of these things, it's the messages that we tell ourselves.
So for me, the message I always tell myself is quitting isn't an option.
I mean, once in a while, you kind of have to quit if like listen to the universe, whatever
you're going to kill yourself or something.
But for me, it was just, you know, whatever it takes, there's no way I'm stopping.
And I have to go up this muddy hill 20 times because I keep sliding.
I'm sure there's a way.
It's probably a personality flaw.
What is your love for chocolate come from?
Oh, it's a great question.
Both of my Joe Rogan interviews, that's the first question that he asked.
So I'm glad that we've gotten to that.
So one, I've always loved chocolate and I call it like a secret.
But now that I keep telling, if you keep telling the same secret, it's actually no longer a
secret that I have a secret, which is not secret because I'm telling you on a podcast,
life as a chocolate shaman.
So when I give keynotes at tech conference, I say, I'm happy to give a keynote, but I want to
lead a sacred cacao ceremony in the night.
I'm actually, believe it or not, the official chocolate shaman of what used to be called
exponential medicine, which is part of Singularity University.
Now, my friend Daniel Kraft, who runs it, it's going to be called next med.
And so, but I'll have to go back as I was going to Berlin a lot of years ago.
And I've always loved chocolate, but I was going to Berlin to give a keynote at a big conference
called TOA, Tech Open Air.
And so when I got there, the first night, I was supposed to give a talk, but there had been
some mix up.
They'd forgotten to reserve the room.
And so the talk got canceled.
And in the brochure, they had all these different events around Berlin that you could go to.
And one of them was a cacao ceremony.
And so I went there and actually met somebody, Viviana, who is still a friend, but I met
going in there and there was this cacao ceremony, these kind of hippie dudes.
And then everybody got the cacao.
And then they said, all right, as they talked a little bit about the process.
And then they said, all right, everyone just stand and kind of we're going to spin around
in a circle for 45 minutes.
And so I spun around in the circle for like 10 minutes, but then I had to leave because
I had to go to something else.
And so I thought that was that.
But then I saw Viviana the next day and I said, how did the cacao ceremony go?
And she showed me these pictures of all of these people mostly naked.
It turned into chaos.
And it was like, ha, so let me get this straight.
People drank chocolate, then they spun around in a circle and something else happened.
Anyway, so then two days later, I was invited to another cacao ceremony, which was also
actually part of this toa.
And that was kind of more structured and it was more sane because it was part of this thing.
And at the end of that, I had this, I thought, one, how the greatest thing ever, a sacred
cacao ceremony, like you drink chocolate milk and everybody's free.
And I love that idea because I've never done drugs.
I don't drink.
Part of it is because I think whatever, like I was saying with the ultra running, all of
the possibilities are within us if we can get out of our own way.
And then I thought, well, I think I can do a better job than what I experienced in Berlin.
So I came back and I thought, all right, I'm going to get accredited as a cacao shaman.
And this will shock you because I know if you're going to be like a rabbi or a priest
or something, there's some process.
And shockingly, there's no official process to accommodate chocolate shaman.
And so I thought, all right, well, you know, I'm just going to train myself and when I'm
ready, I'm going to declare my chocolate shamanism.
So I started studying different things.
And when I was ready, I just said, now I'm a chocolate shaman, self declared.
Self declared.
And so, but I do these ceremonies and I've done them at tech conferences.
I did one in Soho House in New York.
I did it at Place Rancho La Puerta in Mexico.
And every time it's the same thing because it's just if people are given a license to be free.
Just it doesn't matter.
And what I always say is you're here for a sacred cacao ceremony, but the truth is there's
no such thing as sacred cacao and there's no sacred mountains and there's no sacred people
and there's no sacred plans because nothing is sacred if we don't attribute ascribe sacredness
to it.
But if we recognize that everything is sacred, then we'll live different lives.
And for the purpose of this ceremony, we're just going to say, all right, we're going
to focus on this cacao, which actually has been used ceremonially for 5,000 years.
It has all these wonderful properties.
But it's just people who get that license and then they're just free and people are
dancing and all sorts of things.
Is the goal to celebrate life in general, is it to celebrate the senses, like taste?
Is it to celebrate yourself, each other?
I think the core is gratitude and just appreciation.
All the experiences in life.
Yeah, just of being alive, of just living in this sacred world where we have all these
things that we don't even pay any attention to.
My friend AJ Jacobs, he had a wonderful book that I used the spirit of it in the ceremonies,
not exactly, but he was in a restaurant in New York, a coffee shop, and his child said,
hey, where does the coffee come from?
I mean, he's like a wonderful big thinker.
And he started really answering that question, well, here's where the beans come from, but
how did the beans get here and who painted the yellow line on the street so the truck
didn't crash and who made the cup?
And he spent a year making a full spreadsheet of all of the people who in one way or another
played some role in that one cup of coffee.
And he traveled all around the world thanking them.
It's like, thank you for painting the yellow line on the road.
And so for me with the cacao, part of when I do these ceremonies is just to say, like,
you're drinking this cacao, but there's a person who planted the seed.
There's a person who watered the plant.
There's a person.
And I just think that level of awareness, and it's true with anything like you have
in front of you a stuffed hedgehog.
Somebody made that.
I love it.
It's great.
But if we just said, all right, where does this stuffed hedgehog come from?
We would have a full story of globalization, of the interconnection of people all around
the world doing all sorts of things, of human imagination.
It's beyond our capacity and our daily, we'd go insane if every day, like we're speaking
into a microphone, well, what are the hundreds of years of technology that make this possible?
But if just once in a while, we just focus on one thing and say, this thing is sacred.
And because I'm recognizing that and I'm having an appreciation for the world around me, it
just kind of makes my life feel more sacred.
It makes me recognize my connection to others.
So that's the gist of it.
Yeah, it's funny.
I often look at things in this world and moments and just am in awe of the full universe that
brought that to be.
In a similar way as you're saying, but I don't as often think about exactly what you're saying,
which is the number of people behind every little thing we get to enjoy.
I mean, yeah, this hedgehog, this microphone is like directly like thousands of people
involved.
Millions.
And then indirectly millions, like, and they're all like this microphone that there's like
artists essentially, like people who made it their life's work all across like from the
factories to the manufacturer, there's families that the production of this microphone and
this hedgehog are fed because of the skill of this human that helped contribute to that
development.
Yeah, it's.
And like Isaac Newton and John Von Neumann are in this microphone.
They're standing on the shoulders of John.
So we're standing on their shoulders and somebody will be standing on ours.
You mentioned one shared world.
Yeah.
What is it?
Well, thanks for asking.
And by the way, what I will say is the people who are listening, this is so incredible.
And I'm so thrilled to have this kind of long conversation.
A little person who's listening.
Exactly.
Thank you.
Past the five hour mark.
Thanks, mom.
The.
I salute you.
Yeah.
Somebody was like sleeping for the first four hours and just woke up.
Now is the good stuff.
I've been saving it.
And I have to say that so much of our lives is forced into these short bursts that I'm
just so appreciative to have the chance to have this conversation.
So thank you for that one.
Some people would say five hours is short, so.
Not seeing that.
Let's go.
And that's it.
My girlfriend says that if I was captured and tortured and they were going to interrogate
me, it's like at the end they'd say, all right.
No, we're sick of this guy.
We quit.
Let him go.
I love it.
So background on one shared world, I mentioned I'm on a faculty for Singularity University
in the earliest days of the pandemic, I was invited to give a talk on whether the tools
of the genetics and biotech revolutions were a match for the outbreak.
And my view was then as now that the answer to that question is yes.
But I woke up that morning and I felt that that wasn't the most important talk that I
could give.
There was something else that was more pressing for me.
And that was the realization, they were asking the question, well, why weren't we prepared
for this pandemic?
Because we could have been, we weren't.
And because of that, why can't we respond adequately to this outbreak?
And then there was the thing, well, even if we respond somehow miraculously overcome
this pandemic, it's a periodic victory if we don't prepare ourselves to respond to the
broader category of pandemics, particularly as we enter the age of synthetic biology.
But if somehow miraculously we solve that problem, but we don't solve the problem of
climate change, well, kind of who cares?
We didn't have a pandemic, but we wiped everybody out from climate change.
And let's just say, you get where this is going, that we organize ourselves and we solve
climate change.
And then we have a nuclear war because everybody's particularly China now, but US, former Soviet
Union are building all of these nuclear weapons.
Who cares that we solve climate change because we're all gone anyway?
And the meta category bringing all of those things together was this mismatch between
the increasingly global and shared nature of the biggest challenges that we face and
our inability to solve that entire category of problems.
And there's a historical issue, which is that prior to the 30 years war in the 17th century,
we had all these different kinds of sovereignty and religious and different kinds of organizational
principles and everybody got in this war and in the series of treaties that together are
called the piece of Westphalia, the framework for the modern, what we now understand as
the modern nation state was late.
And then through colonialism and other means, that idea of a state is what it is today spread
throughout the world.
Then through particularly the late 19th and early 20th century, we realized how unstable
that system was because you always had these jockeying between sovereign states and some
were rising and some were falling and you ended up in war.
And that was the genius of the generations who came together in 1945 in San Francisco
and the planning had even started before then who said, well, we can't just have that world.
We need to have an overlay and we talked about the UN and the WHO of systems which transcend
our national sovereignty.
They don't get rid of them, but they transcend them so we can solve this category of problems.
But we're now reaching a point where our reach as humans, even individually but collectively,
is so great that there's a mismatch between, as I said, the nature of the problems and the
ability to solve those problems.
And unless we can address that broader global collective action problem, we're going to
extinct ourselves and we see these different what I call verticals, whether it's climate
change or trying to prevent nuclear weapons proliferation or anything else.
But none of those can succeed and frankly, it doesn't even matter if one succeeds because
all of them have the potential to lead to extinction level events.
So anyway, I gave that talk and that talk went viral.
I stayed up all night the next night and I drafted.
I think it was like an insanity, but I think a lot of us were manic in those early days
of the pandemics wanting to do something.
And so I stayed up all night and I drafted what I called a declaration of global interdependence.
And I posted that on my website, my jamiemuscle.com, it's still there.
And that went viral.
And so then I called a meeting just on the people on my personal email list.
And so we had people from 25 countries.
There were all of these people who were having the same thing.
There's something wrong in the world and they wanted to be part of a process of fixing it.
And so it was a crazy 35 days where we broke into eight different working groups.
We had an amazing team that helped redraft what became the Declaration of Interdependence,
which is now in 20 languages.
We laid out a work plan.
We founded this organization called One Shared World.
The URL is oneshared.world.
And it's just been this incredible journey.
We now have people who are participating in one way or another from 120 different countries.
We have our public events exploring these issues, get millions of viewers.
We have world leaders who are participating.
So the vision is to work on some of these big problems, arbitrary number of problems
that present themselves in the world that face all of human civilization and to be able
to work together.
Well, that is, but there's a macro, a meta problem, which is the global collective action
problem.
And so the idea is even if we just focus on the verticals, on the manifestations of the
global collective action problem, there'll be an infinite number of those things.
So while we work on those things like climate change, pandemics, WMD, and other things,
we also have to ask the bigger questions of why can't we solve this category of problems.
And the idea is, at least from my observation, is that whenever big decisions are being made,
our national leaders and corporate leaders are doing exactly what we've hired them to
do.
They're maximizing for national interest, even or corporate interest, even at the expense
of everybody.
And so it's not that we want to get rid of states, states are essential in our world
system.
It's not we want to undermine the UN, which is also essential, but massively underperforming.
What we want to do is to create an empowered global constituency of people who are demanding
that their leaders at all levels just do a better job of balancing broader and narrower
interests.
So this is more like a make it more symmetric in terms of power.
It's holding accountable the nations, the leaders.
The problem is nations are powerful.
We talked about China quite a bit.
How do you have an organization of citizens of Earth that can solve this collective problem
that holds China accountable?
It's difficult because the UN, you could say a lot of things, but to call it effective
is hard.
The internet almost is a kind of representation of a collective force that holds nations accountable.
Not to give Twitter too much credit, but social networks broadly speaking.
So you have hope that there's possible to build such collections of humans that really
resist China.
Not necessarily resist China, but our cultures change over time.
The idea of the modern nation state would not have made sense to people in the 13th
or 14th century.
The idea that became the United Nations, it had its earliest days in the philosophies
of Kant.
It took a long time for these ideas to be realized.
And so the idea, and we're far from successful.
We've had little minor successes, which we're very proud of.
We got the G20 leaders to incorporate the language that we provided on addressing the
needs of the world's most vulnerable populations into the final summit communique from the
G20 summit in Riyadh.
This year, we're just on the verge of having our language pat on the same issue, ensuring
everyone on earth has access to safe water, basic sanitation and hygiene and essential
pandemic protection by 2030 passed as part of a resolution in the United Nations General
Assembly.
And it's, we're primarily, it's young people all around the world.
And when I told them in the beginning of this year, this is our goal.
We're going to get the UN General Assembly to pass a resolution with our language in it.
I mean, first, I think they all thought it was insane, but they were too young and inexperienced
to know how insane it was.
But now these, these young people are just so excited that it's actually happening.
So what we're trying to do is, is really to create a movement, which we don't feel that
we need to do from scratch because there are a lot of movements.
Like right now, we just had the Glasgow G20, I mean, I'm sorry, the Glasgow climate change,
COP26.
And then Greta Thunberg, who has a huge following and who is an amazing young woman, but I was
kind of disappointed in what she said afterwards.
It became like a meme on Twitter, which was blah, blah, blah.
And basically it was like, blah, blah, blah.
These old people are just screwing around and it's, it's a waste of time.
And definitely the critique is merited, but young people have never been more empowered,
educated, connected than they are now.
And so that's what we've had a process with, with One Shared World, where we partnered
with the Model United Nations, the Aga Khan Foundation, the India Sanitation Coalition.
And what we did is say, all right, we have this goal, water sanitation, hygiene and pandemic
protection for everyone on earth by 2030.
And we had debates and consultations using the Model UN framework all around the world
in multiple languages, and we said, come up with a plan for how this could be achieved.
And these brilliant young people in every country, not every country, most countries,
they all contributed.
Then we had a plan.
Then I recruited friends of mine, like my friend Hans Karel in Sweden, who's the former
chief counsel of the whole United Nations, and asked him and others to work with these
young people and representative to turn that into what looks exactly like a UN resolution.
It's just written by a bunch of kids all around the world.
We then sent that to every permanent representative, every government representative at the UN.
And that was why working with the German and Spanish governments, why the language essentialized
from that document, is about to pass the UN.
And it doesn't mean that just passing a UN general assembly resolution changes anything.
But we think that there's a model of engaging people, just like you're talking about with
these people who are outside of the traditional power structures and who want to have a voice.
But I think we need to give a little bit of structure because just going, I'm a big fan
of global citizen, but just going to a global citizen concert and waving your iPhone back
and forth and tweeting about it isn't enough to drive the kind of change that's required.
We need to come together even in nontraditional ways and articulate the change we want and
build popular movements to make that happen.
And popular means scale and then movements at scale that actually, at the individual level,
do something and that's then magnified with the scale to actually have a significant impact.
I mean, at its best, you hear a lot of folks talk about the various cryptocurrencies as
possibly helping.
You have young people get involved in challenging the power structures by challenging the monetary
system.
And some of it is number go up.
People get excited when they can make a little bit of money.
But that's actually almost like an entry point because then you almost feel empowered.
And because of that, you start to think about some of these philosophical ideas that I as
a young person have the power to change the world.
All of these senior folks in the position of power, they were like, first of all, they
were once young and powerless like me.
And I could be part of the next generation that makes a change.
Although the things I see that are wrong with the world, I can make it better.
And it's very true that the overly powerful nations of the world could be a relic of the
past.
That could be a 20th century and before idea that was tried, create a lot of benefit.
But we also saw the problems with that kind of world, extreme nationalism.
We see the benefits and the problems of the Cold War, arguably Cold War got us to the
moon.
But there could be a lot of other different mechanisms that inspired competition, especially
friendly competition between nations versus adversarial competition that resulted in the
response to COVID, for example, with China and the United States and Russia and the secrecy,
the censorship.
All the things that are basically against the spirit of science and resulted in the
loss of trillions of dollars in the cost of countless lives.
What gives you hope about the future, Jamie?
One of the things, you mentioned cryptocurrency and then as you know better than most, there's
cryptocurrency and then underneath the cryptocurrency, there's the blockchain and the distributed
ledger.
And then, like we talked about, there are all these young people who are able to connect
with each other, to organize in new ways.
And I work with these young people every single day through one shared world primarily, but
also other things.
And there's so much optimism, there's so much hope that I just have a lot of faith that
we're going to figure something out.
I'm an optimist by nature and that doesn't mean that we need to be blind to the dangers.
There are very, very real dangers, but just given half the chance, people want to be good.
People want to do the right thing.
And I do believe that there's a role for the at least near term for governments, but there's
always a role for leadership.
And I'm I guess like a Gramscian in the sense that I think that we need to create frameworks
and structures that allow leaders to emerge.
And we need to build norms so that the leaders who emerge are leaders who call on us, inspire
our best instincts and not drive us toward our worst.
But I really see a lot of hope and when you say this all the time in your podcast, and
you may even be more optimistic to me because you look at the darkest moments of human history
and see hope, but we're kind of a crazy, wonderful species.
I mean, yes, we figured out ways to slaughter each other at scale, but we've come up with
these wonderful philosophies about love and all of those things.
And yeah, maybe the bonobos have some love in their cultures, but we're kind of a wonderful
magical species.
And if we just can create enough of an infrastructure, it doesn't need to be and shouldn't be controlling
just enough of an infrastructure so that people are stakeholders, feel like they're stakeholders
in contributing to a positive story.
I just really feel that the sky is the limit.
So if there's somebody who's young right now, or somebody in high school, somebody in college
listening to you, you've done a lot of incredible things.
You're respected by a lot of the elites, you're respected by the people, so you're both able
to speak to all groups, walk through the fire, like you mentioned with this lab leak.
What advice would you give to young kids today that are inspired by your story?
Well, thank you.
I mean, I think there's one, there's lots of, I'm honored if anybody is inspired, but
it's the same thing as I said with the science that it's all about values.
The core of everything is knowing who you are.
And so yes, I mean, there's the broader thing of following your passions, a creative mind
and an inquisitive mind is the core of everything because the knowledge base is constantly sharing,
so learning how to learn.
But at the core of everything is investing in knowing who you are and what you stand
for because that's the way, that's the path to leading a meaningful life, to contributing,
to not feeling alienated from your life as you get older and just like you live, it's
an ongoing process and we all make mistakes and we all kind of travel down wrong paths
and just have some love for yourself and recognize that just at every, like I was saying with
the Iron Man, just when you think there's no possibility that you can go on, there's
a 100% possibility that you can go on and just when you think that nothing better will
happen to you, there's a 100% chance that something better will happen to you, you just
got to keep going.
Jamie, this I've been a fan of yours.
I think first heard you on your Rogan experience, but been following your work, your bold, fearless
work with speaking about the lab leak and everything you represent from your brilliance
to your kindness and the fact that you spend your valuable time with me today and now I
officially made you miss your flight and the fact that you said that whether you were being
nice or not, I don't know that you would be okay with that means the world to me and
I'm really honored that you will spend your time with me today.
Well, really, it's been such a great pleasure and thank you for creating a forum to have
these kinds of long conversations, so I really enjoyed it and thank you and if anybody has
now listened for what's it been, five and a half hours?
Thank you for listening.
Welcome.
Five hour club.
Exactly.
Represent.
Thank you, Jamie.
Thanks, Lex.
This is awesome.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Jamie Metzel.
To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now let me leave you some words from Richard Feynman about science and religion, which
I think also applies to science and geopolitics because I believe scientists have the responsibility
to think broadly about the world so that they may understand the bigger impact of their
inventions.
The quote goes like this, in this age of specialization, men who thoroughly know one field
are often incompetent to discuss another.
The old problems, such as the relation of science and religion, are still with us and
I believe present as difficult dilemmas as ever, but they are not often publicly discussed
because of the limitations of specialization.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.